2 INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS
Foreword and acknowledgements
 
This script has been written for students who are interested in the English WU bachelor 
study programme Business and Economics and want to take the entry exam. The content 
of this script has been taken from the book Fuhrmann, Bettina: Introduction to Business and 
Economics. Verlag Jugend & Volk, Wien, 2019. It is the aim of this book to explain some ba-
sic concepts of business and economics and their interrelationships to those who are in-
terested but have little previous knowledge of business matters and economic issues. As 
both business studies and economics are comprehensive, multifaceted and interdisciplin-
ary scientific fields, a short introduction can only cover selected topics. Nevertheless, it is 
the intention of this short introduction to provide a solid basis on which to build more 
knowledge as well as to spark an enduring interest in business and economics and moti-
vate readers to learn more.
Such a textbook – no matter how many pages it has – always profits from feedback from 
other business teachers who are experts in their respective fields. I consider myself very 
lucky to have colleagues who have done so and contributed to the development of the text. 
Therefore, I would like to thank (in alphabetical order)
Nora Cechovsky, Jesus Crespo Cuaresma, Ingrid Dobrovits, Eva Eberhartinger,  
Richard Fortmüller, Gerhard Geissler, Edith Littich, Harald Oberhofer,  
Rupert Sausgruber, Christiane Schopf, Gerhard Speckbacher,  
Rosanna Steininger, Barbara Stöttinger and Julia Szoncsitz
for their valuable comments on the manuscript.
I would also like to thank my family for letting me work on the book not only during count-
less evenings but also on weekends. As it is my firm belief that economic knowledge is of 
utmost importance to each and every person regardless of his or her age, gender, or per -
sonal background, I dedicate the book to all young learners who should understand – the 
sooner the better – that they are all an active part of the economy and there is no opting 
out of economic decisions.
Bettina Fuhrmann
Director of the Institute for Business Education  
Vienna University of Economics and Business 
Vienna, 2019