INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 19
3.4 Businesses come “in all sizes”, large and small
There is an enormous variety of businesses: micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME 
or just SME) as well as large businesses. About 99% of all businesses in the EU are SMEs. 
The European Commission differentiates between these types of businesses (see http://
ec.europa.eu) as presented in table 1.
Company category Staff headcount Turnover OR Balance sheet total
Micro < 10 ≤ €2 m ≤ €2 m
Small < 50 ≤ €10 m ≤ €10 m
Medium-sized < 250 ≤ €50 m ≤ €43 m
Table 1. Size categories of businesses
The definition of an SME is important for access to finance and EU support programmes 
targeted specifically at these enterprises. Tina and Steve have a micro company; even if 
they hire two assistants, they are still a micro company. AT&S on the other hand, with about 
10,000 employees, is a large company.
The size of a business is also relevant in terms of legal requirements for their accounting 
(see chapter 6, Accounting). In many countries, small businesses are allowed to use sim-
pler accounting methods in order to calculate their profits or losses.
3.5 Businesses may be local, national or international
A local (or regional) business operates in a small, limited area. Most customers live very 
close to the business. They do not serve a national or international market. Tina’s and 
Steve’s business would be such a local business, at least at the beginning. The most im-
portant challenge of (small) local businesses is to have sufficient financial funds and to 
acquire a substantial number of customers. Many business owners face the difficulties of 
undercapitalisation: their own funds are limited and it is very hard for them to access ad-
ditional funding.
A national business serves the home market (the market within a country), but not the in-
ternational market. An insurance company or a bakery that operates all over Austria, but 
not abroad, is a national business. Like a local business, it has to choose a suitable loca-
tion. Additionally, it has to decide how to deliver its goods and services to other places 
within the country. The supply chain is much longer.
International (or multinational) businesses make and/or sell their goods and services in 
more than one country. As the home market might be limited and too small for some com-
panies, they strive to serve a larger market. A larger, international market brings along a 
number of challenges: an even longer supply chain, different legal and economic systems, 
different cultures and languages, maybe also different currencies. As the number of multi-
national businesses has increased over time, the world has become globalised and we 
have experienced globalisation. AT&S is an international business that has production 
plants in Asian countries as well as in Austria and that sells its goods to other businesses 
all over the world.