INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS36
Marketing
5.5.3 Customer analysis
Customer analysis will often be an important element of market research activities. In order 
to learn more about (potential) customers, a business will try to learn more about:
 ∎ Who its current and potential customers are: If they are consumers, the business op-
erates in a business-to-consumer market (B2C), otherwise in a business-to-business 
market (B2B). Also, the buyer and the user of a product might not be the same persons. 
Some people might influence the buying decisions (e.g. children), although the pur-
chase is made by someone else (the parents, grandparents etc.).
 ∎ What the customers do with the products: The more a business knows about the pre-
ferred use of a product, the more it can develop and improve it according to customers’ 
needs.
 ∎ Where the customers buy the products: This piece of information helps identify the 
preferred channels of distribution. An analysis can also show weaknesses in the distri-
bution channels and encourage the use of alternative channels.
 ∎ When the customers buy the products: This can be helpful to identify seasonal fluctua-
tions and accordingly plan ahead the production and consider price differentiation over 
the year.
 ∎ Why customers choose a product or why they prefer another product: Learning more 
about motives and preferences is important for product development and for enhanc-
ing market share.
5.5.4 Market measures
Market research can also focus on measuring the market. Market size (or market volume) 
is the total sales of a product of all the businesses in the market. Market size can be ex-
pressed as a value (e.g. in euros) or as a quantity (number of pieces sold). AT&S, for ex-
ample, is interested in the electronics market, especially in the market for substrates and 
PCBs. It is relevant for AT&S to see how these markets develop in order to evaluate its own 
position in the market and the potential development in the years to come. That is why at 
AT&S they have researched and collected data on these markets, as can be read in the an-
nual report.