INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS20
Focus on different types of businesses
3.6 Businesses operate in an environment – stakeholders are 
important
There is one thing that all businesses have in common: they are always integrated into an 
environment in which they operate. Therefore, they deal with many other people and/or 
businesses and need to consider their interests as well. Everyone that is (potentially) af-
fected by the activities of a business and/or has an interest in what a business does 
is a stakeholder. Due to globalisation, the world has become a smaller place and the 
number of stakeholders has grown considerably. Furthermore, people are more environ-
mentally conscious and expect businesses to preserve and protect the environment. The 
most important stakeholders of a business are shown in figure 5.
Figure 5. Stakeholders of a business
The owners of a business are stakeholders because they have invested their money in the 
business and want their investment to pay off. The y want to make a profit in order to get 
something in return for the risk they have taken. They also profit from the increase in value 
of a business if the business operates successfully on the market. This increase is usually 
reflected in the price of shares of this business. It can be earned by selling the shares or 
the whole business (for example, the company Runtastic GmbH was bought by Adidas for 
220 million euros). Making a profit may be one, but does not have to be the only goal of the 
owner(s) of a business. Solving a problem, contributing to a solution to a problem that cus-
tomers have (such as computer problems), and making a contribution to the welfare of 
society may also be important. Tina and Steve create value for their customers and they 
also help preserve the environment by repairing and setting up used computers and – con-
sequently – reducing waste.
Communities (local, national, international)
Government
CustomersSuppliers BUSINESS
Employees
Owners Managers