INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS14
Basic economic concepts
if the price level increases and exceeds (or at least equals) marginal costs would busi-
nesses be willing to produce and supply a higher amount.
Figure 2 shows the relationship between prices and supply in the market for computer sup-
port services (e.g. within a country).
2.6.2 The law of demand
Demand, on the other hand, is the quantity of a good or service that customers are 
willing and able to buy. Usually the higher the price is, the lower demand will be. The 
more Tina and Steve as well as other providers charge for their technical computer support 
service per hour, the more demand will decrease (because more and more people cannot 
afford such high prices or are not willing to pay such high prices for that service and will 
instead look for other ways to get help with their computer problems). People’s willingness 
to pay a certain price is related to the utility or the level of satisfaction the people get from 
consuming the service. Figure 3 gives you an idea of how many hours of technical support 
would be demanded in the market, depending on the price.
The graph in figure 3 shows that the quantity demanded decreases as the price rises. Accord-
ingly, the quantity demanded (the quantity that people are willing and able to buy) increases 
as the price falls. Therefore, the quantity demanded is negatively or inversely related to the 
price. All other things equal (“ceteris paribus”), this relationship can be found with almost all 
goods and services in the economy, so that it is also called the law of demand.
2.6.3 The market equilibrium
If we have a look at both curves, we can see that they intersect at a certain point, at the 
price of 150 euros. At this point, the quantity of hours that is demanded in the market 
equals the quantity of hours that is supplied.
Assuming that these curves represent supply and demand in the whole market for com-
puter support services, this price would also be called the market price or equilibrium 
price (because supply equals demand). At the price of 150 euros per hour demand and 
supply balance each other out. As the quantity supplied equals the quantity demanded, 
there is neither a surplus (higher supply than demand) nor a shortage (higher demand than 
supply). At a higher price, demand would be lower than supply and vice versa. 
Figure 3. The demand curve 
(price in euros, quantity in 
1,000 hours)
250
200
150
100
50
0
Quantity
Demand per week
Price
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0