INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 51
5.7.5 Mixing the four Ps for a harmonised blend
Tina and Steve have also thought about their marketing mix. These are their considerations:
Product Steve and Tina are convinced that their products will meet demand 
on the market. Over the past years they have helped many friends 
and family members and they know that there are many more people 
who need support when buying, installing and maintaining a com-
puter or a network. On the one hand they would try to buy used com-
puters that are in good condition at a relatively low price and then 
sell them in an even better condition to people who do not necessar-
ily want to have a brand new computer but who are happy to have a 
ready-to-use computer and always have support available. On the 
other hand they would also develop software that is tailored to the 
needs of their customers and support them when using it.
Price It is clear that used computers must be less expensive than new 
ones. So the price for a used laptop computer must be considerably 
lower than the price for a similar new laptop computer at any other 
computer store. So Tina and Steve need to watch that market very 
closely and try to find low-priced computers in order to beat the com-
petition and cover their costs.
Place They cannot run a computer store where customers can choose from 
dozens of different models of computer. They are also not interested 
in having lots of computers in stock. Computer technology becomes 
obsolete very quickly and they also do not have a lot of space, so 
they decide to keep their stock relatively low and to resell as quickly 
as possible. This can be achieved by delivering the computers to their 
customers’ homes. Additionally, they would offer current deals on 
their website.
Please note: in this context, “stock” is a synonym for “inventory”. As 
you have seen in chapter 4, stock can also be used as a synonym of 
“share”.
Promotion People need to be aware of the product(s) and learn more about what 
is offered. Tina and Steve do not have a huge budget, but they can 
afford to set up a website, to put ads into local newspapers, they can 
be found on social networks and they use leaflets and hope for word-
of-mouth advertising through customers who were satisfied with 
their service to work well for them. 