INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS18
Focus on different types of businesses
The tertiary sector comprises the 
service industry, like distribution, 
banking, insurance, coaching etc. 
Tina and Steve offer services: they 
trade goods, develop software and 
provide technical support.
The more the economic development of a country advances, the more important the third 
sector becomes. In economically highly developed countries, like EU countries with a high 
gross domestic product (GDP) per capita (indicating a high standard of living), the ter-
tiary sector usually accounts for more than 70% of the output of the economy, while the 
primary sector – as important as it may be for providing food – only accounts for a small 
percentage of the output of the economy. 
Please note that GDP is the total monetary value of final goods and services that are 
produced within a country’s borders in a certain time period (usually a year). Therefore, 
it is considered to measure the overall economic activity of a country. GDP is also used 
as an indicator for economic growth: if GDP (adjusted for inflation) increases over time, the 
economy is growing. However, the use of GDP is not undisputed. Critics say that not all 
sources of income are taken into account. What is more, GDP does not tell anything about 
the quality and/or sustainability of growth, nor is it a perfect indicator of economic well-
being in a country. For example, GDP would also increase after ecological disasters that 
require action to rebuild infrastructure and to mitigate the damage. However, GDP is usu-
ally correlated to some indicators of well-being like health status and happiness.
3.3 Businesses can be profit-oriented or not-for-profit
Most businesses aim to operate for a longer time period. In order to do so and to thrive over 
time, most businesses aim to make a profit, i.e. they intend to have higher revenues than 
costs and expenses. Profits are important to the business itself because they can be rein-
vested in the business, which enhances the durability and sustainability of the business. 
Of course, profits are also important to the owners and investors because the profits are 
their reward for the risk they have taken. 
However, there are also businesses (or organisations) that are not-for-profit and mainly aim 
to cover their costs. Nevertheless, they also need to achieve a certain level of revenues (or in 
many cases: donations) in order to be able to offer their goods and services. Any profit they 
make is also beneficial to the organisation, because it can be reinvested and used to enhance 
the services for customers or to engage in more projects. The Red Cross, the World Wildlife 
Fund or Greenpeace are examples of such non-profit organisations (NPOs).