INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 57
figure does not necessarily indicate a problem. It rather indicates that the business has 
invested in some assets. Inflows of cash from investments could only come from the sale 
of assets or some investments held.
Financing activities refer to cash that is flowing in from investors or creditors and flowing 
out for paying interest, dividends or repaying debt. At the bottom of the cash flow state-
ment the net change in cash and equivalents can be found. If this figure is positive, then 
the business has had a positive cash flow that can be used for further activities like making 
investments, expanding the business or for repaying debt.
The cash flow statement of AT&S shows an (overall) positive picture; cash flow has in-
creased over the past year. Cash flow from operating activities has been positive and a bit 
higher in 2017/18 than in 2016/17. Due to investments, cash flow from investing activities 
was negative in both years but – at least partly – counterbalanced by cash flow from fi-
nancing activities and from operating activities. All in all, cash flow is 67.2 million euros 
(270.7 – 203.5) for 2017/18.
Table 5. Example of a cash flow statement (source: AT&S annual report 2017/18)
Please note: not all components of this cash flow statement have been explained in the text.
6.3 What can be learnt from reading a balance sheet and an 
income statement
Balance sheets and income statements should always be read with some caution. A lot 
depends on the valuation of assets and businesses are not completely free to determine 
the values of their assets. Depreciation also decreases the value of assets in the balance 
sheet that might actually have a higher value.
Nevertheless, a lot can be learnt by taking a closer look at the balance sheet and the in-
come statement of a business. It is of particular interest to see how some positions have 
developed over time as well as in comparison to other competitors in the market. This al-
lows us to answer questions like:
Question 1: Which assets does the business have – is there a higher percentage of current 
or non-current assets and is this typical of that type of business?
Question 2: How has equity developed and how have the assets been financed? Is there a 
higher percentage of long-term or short-term liabilities? 
Question 3: Is there a balance between non-current assets and long-term financial re-
sources? 