INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 13
2.6 Supply and demand: Households, businesses 
and the government meet in the market
In a market economy, goods and services are offered and sold on/at markets. Buyers and 
sellers meet to communicate the conditions of exchanging goods and services and thus 
form a market. A market can be an actual place, like a flower market in the city of Rome or 
a flea market in a small village, but it can also be a virtual place like a market on the Inter-
net (e.g. eBay, Amazon). Buying and selling take place in shops, but also on the phone. 
Therefore, there are many different markets, also depending on what is offered: consumer 
goods markets, labour markets (supply and demand for work), housing markets, money 
markets, capital markets, commodity markets (supply and demand for raw materials).
2.6.1 The law of supply 
Supply (of a certain good or service) is the quantity of that good or service that is 
available for purchase. Basically, this quantity mainly depends on the businesses’ pro-
duction capacities and the available resources, but also on the price that can be charged 
for the good or the service. The higher this price is, the higher the supply will be. All 
other things held constant (“ceteris paribus”), this relationship is true for most goods and 
services in the economy (law of supply). 
In Tina’s and Steve’s case, the quantity of hours that they (as well as other providers of 
similar computer support services) are willing to work depends on the price they can charge 
and that will be paid. It is tiring work and the providers of this service need to be very 
skilled. If the price is low, let’s say below 30 euros per hour for example, no provider would 
offer that service. The opportunity cost would be too high: as the providers are very skilled, 
they could earn more money by doing something else (that is also less tiring), so they would 
leave this market and offer another kind of service. The higher the price, the higher the 
number of hours that would be offered. More potential providers would enter the market 
and would be willing to offer a higher number of hours of their service. 
The shape of the supply curve can also be explained by the concept of increasing marginal 
costs faced by many industries and businesses. Marginal cost is the cost of producing an 
additional unit of a good or by providing an additional unit of a service. As output increases 
and exceeds a certain level it will become more and more costly to produce; businesses 
need to build higher capacities (machinery, personnel) so marginal costs would rise. Only 
250
200
150
100
50
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Quantity
Supply per week
Price
Figure 2. The supply curve 
(price in euros, quantity in 
1,000 hours)