INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS52
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
6 Accounting – keeping record 
of business transactions
During their first year in business, Tina and Steve buy and sell a lot of computers, they sup-
port their customers by solving their computer problems, and they hire two assistants who 
deal with the customers and other stakeholders, take care of the company’s website and 
do all the paperwork and the bookkeeping. This means that a lot of business transactions 
like purchases, sales, borrowing and lending money etc. take place and businesses need 
to keep accurate records of these business transactions. Bookkeepers are responsible 
for recording these transactions that are always verified by a document (e.g. an invoice or 
a receipt). The aim of recording all transactions is to generate information on the financial 
status of the business. Statements that provide this information are called accounts.
6.1 What a balance sheet is
Tina and Steve have started their business, using computers that they already had as well 
as a new one. They have also purchased some equipment and office furniture and use Ti-
na’s car to drive to their customers. Computers, office equipment and cars – these things 
are all assets, “things” that the business owns and that are used for the business. Tina and 
Steve make a list with all the assets of their business and their values in euros (on the left 
side of the list) and compare it with the amount of money that had to be borrowed from the 
bank (on the right side of the list) to pay for some of their purchases:
Assets euros euros
Office equipment including computers 25,000
Car 8,000
Inventory: computers in stock to be sold again 12,500 Bank loan 25,000
Cash and bank deposit 3,500
49,000
Please note that there are two types of computers in the list: computers that are used in 
the office and are not for sale, and other computers that were bought to be resold (inven-
tory). This difference is important because they are different types of assets.
Only part of the assets was financed by using money from the bank loan. This is due to the 
fact that Tina uses her own car exclusively for the company and Steve uses computers that 
he already owned. They also had some money of their own which they used for setting up 
the business. Therefore, the total amount of the bank loan (which is a liability, i.e. money 
that is owed to someone else) is lower than the total amount of the assets. The difference 
between these two positions is the amount that Tina and Steve were able to finance them-
selves; it is called owner’s equity. It is the proportion of the assets that was NOT financed 
by debt. If we add this position to Tina’s and Steve’s list, their list becomes a balance 
sheet: