INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS6
Basic economic concepts
1 Introduction to business matters
Over the past few years Tina has noticed that 
quite a lot of people buy new computers even 
though their old ones are still working. At the 
same time other people are perfectly happy with a 
used computer as long as it works. They do not 
need to have the latest model, they are just inter-
ested in having access to the Internet and the 
computer programs that they want to use. What is 
more, many people need help to get started with 
their new computer, and some also need help later on with new releases of software, data 
storage and security issues.
At school and also later during their university studies, Tina and her former classmate 
Steve specialised in computer science and in business. They have always tried to help their 
families and friends with any computer is-
sues. And as more and more friends of their 
friends as well as neighbours and acquain-
tances of their families have asked for help, 
they have considered starting a business 
that offers a wide range of professional 
computer services.
 A business is an entity that offers goods 
and/or services to customers. Businesses 
do not produce primarily for their own needs 
or work exclusively for their families’ and 
friends’ needs, but for someone else: for their customers. Businesses usually charge a 
price for their goods and services so that they get something in return. Exchanging goods 
and services against money or other means of payment (or exchange) is a main 
characteristic of the economy. 
Tina and Steve consider the following idea: buying used computers at a low price, checking 
and repairing them (if necessary), and adjusting/modifying them to the needs and wishes 
of their customers. By doing so, Tina and Steve are able to offer ready-to-use computers at 
an affordable price and create value for their customers.
They also consider offering additional services such as setting up the computer at the us-
er’s home, installing software, connecting the computer to the Internet, explaining how to 
use the computer etc. Another idea that comes to their minds is offering online help for 
problems that might occur. Customers facing a problem with their computer would be sup-
ported within 24 hours. Tina and Steve are even considering developing tailor-made soft-
ware for their customers. With so many ideas, Tina and Steve are convinced that they can 
start a profitable business. That is exactly what they want to do as they need to earn mon-
ey to make a living. 
