INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 11
In the circular flow of the economy (see figure 1), public authorities (mainly governments) 
also play an important role. They levy taxes from households and businesses and use the 
money to provide goods, transfer payments and subsidies. Such goods as infrastructure 
(e.g. streets and street lights) and services like national defence and public security (e.g. 
police) need to be provided by governments and financed by taxation. There is demand for 
these goods, but private businesses would not want to supply them as “free riders” (people 
who do not pay for a good or service) cannot be excluded from enjoying them. In many – but 
not all – countries health care and education are also provided (at least to a large extent) 
by public authorities. 
Figure 1. The circular flow of goods, services and money within the economy
Division of labour and specialisation
Without exchange of goods and services, individuals would have to produce everything 
they need themselves. That would be very difficult, time-consuming and inefficient be-
cause they would have to spend time on performing tasks that they lack the skills for. Ex-
changing goods and services allows for the division of labour and therefore specialisation. 
Individuals and businesses can concentrate on what they can do best. This explains the 
wide variety of jobs and of businesses. Using a widely accepted means of exchange like 
money facilitates the exchanges.
Specialisation can be found on many levels: 
 ∎ Within households, for example where individuals can concentrate on what they can 
do best or what they like doing (like one individual does the shopping, the other one the 
cooking). 
 ∎ The same principle applies to businesses: within businesses, some people concen-
trate on production, others on procurement, some others on sales, on recording all 
Private 
households
Government
(public authorities)
Businesses
Goods, services, transfer payments Goods, services and subsidies
Taxes Taxes
Payments
Labour
Wages
Goods and services