INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS54
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
Liabilities are debts and obligations that are owed to other persons, businesses or banks 
and need to be repaid at a certain point in time and/or over a certain period of time. These 
funds are usually provided by banks or suppliers. Money owed to suppliers is also called 
trade credit or trade payables. Current liabilities are debts or obligations that are due with-
in one year. Accordingly, non-current liabilities have a duration of more than one year.
Equity / owner’s equity is the difference of assets and liabilities. It is an indicator of the 
wealth of the company. A high equity ratio (= equity / total capital) indicates that the re-
spective portion of assets was financed by the company’s own resources (for example with 
funds provided by the owners or shareholders of the company). It is important for a busi-
ness to have sufficient equity because: 1) equity usually does not have to be repaid, 2) it 
helps a business to be relatively independent from its creditors and 3) if the company has 
a loss and there is a higher amount of equity, the company will not be over-indebted.
Determining the value of assets is an important but also tricky task. While it might not be 
difficult to determine the exact amount of a bank loan, it is more difficult to tell what a build-
ing is worth many years after it was buil t. Businesses usually want to present themselves 
in the best way possible when setting up their balance sheet. However, they need to stick 
to the legal rules and regulations that aim to ensure that information given in balance 
sheets can be trusted.
6.2 Other components of the financial statement of a business
The balance sheet is not the only component of the financial statement of a business. The 
financial statement of the business aims to show the performance of the business over a 
certain period of time, but the balance sheet only shows the assets, liabilities and equity at a 
certain point in time. It does not contain information on total sales (turnover), nor does it 
reveal the cost of producing the goods and services or other expenses. Therefore, the finan-
cial statement consists of the balance sheet, the income statement (profit and loss account) 
and the cash flow statement, which gives an insight into the inflow and outflow of cash.
Figure 24. The main components of a financial statement of a business
Balance sheet
Assets, liabilities 
and equity
Income 
statement
Revenues, costs 
and expenses
Cash flow 
statement
Inflow and 
outflow of cash
Financial statement
reveals the performance of a business over a certain period of time