INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS40
Marketing
Mass marketing, segment marketing and niche marketing
A business applies mass marketing if it ignores the different segments of a market and 
offers the same product to all customers. The product is promoted to all segments of a 
market in almost the same way. Mass marketing is often applied for products like pens and 
pencils, soaps, personal hygiene products and detergents because they are used by so 
many people regardless of their personal characteristics. Mass marketing allows a busi-
ness to produce a relatively large number of the same product and sell it to a relatively large 
market. On the one hand, this enables the business to gain economies of scale: if a large 
number of identical products is produced, some costs will not increase accordingly (in a 
directly proportional way) but can be divided by a larger number of products. This results 
in reduced costs per unit due to an increased total output of a product. On the other hand, 
mass marketing is also inflexible and makes it more difficult to react to particular changes 
in some target markets.
Segment marketing means offering different products to one or more segments ( some 
segmentation). Businesses focus their (limited) resources on offering products that are 
tailored to the needs and wants of their customers in the segments that they know best 
(strategic fit).
Niche marketing, however, focuses on particular segments of a market. Different products 
are offered to subgroups within segments (more segmentation). Many small businesses 
rather employ niche marketing because they would not be able to produce the quantity of 
products for a mass market. Some businesses just target selected segments of a market 
because they have specialised in a certain field. If they are good at it, they can be market 
leaders regardless of their size.
Tina and Steve have chosen niche marketing. They are a small business and they focus on 
the special needs of customers, not the mass market. They target individual persons, sole 
proprietors and small offices / home offices (that is their segment) with limited funds for 
their computer equipment, no need to have the latest computer model or release of a pro-
gram and a high need of technical support (that is their niche within the segment).
Targeting is the first step towards an effective marketing strategy.  It is based on the 
process of evaluating each segment’s attractiveness and selecting one or more segments 
to enter. Therefore, a target market, a segment, is a group of people or businesses towards 
whom a business markets its goods, services or ideas with a strategy designed to satisfy 
their specific needs and preferences. In order to do so, it takes a good marketing mix as a 
second step to serve the target market. 