INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS42
Marketing
The product mix
According to the product-mix strategy of a business it can specialise in one sort of product 
(by offering just one product line) or diversify its production (by offering different product 
lines, increasing product mix width) or even both. 
As consumers’ needs and wants change over time, products need to be altered from time 
to time. Minor changes (like different packaging, colours, etc.) are called a relaunch. If a 
relaunch is not enough to keep customers satisfied, then major changes are necessary or 
the product has to be eliminated from the product line altogether. Businesses can either 
add new products to an existing product line (which is a line extension, like producing more 
flavours of ice cream) or they can add a new product line (which is a mix extension, like 
yogurts in addition to ice cream). Products can also be altered over time (creating a new 
range of ice cream products instead of the existing one) or eliminated from the product 
range of a company if a relaunch does not seem promising.
Figure 16. Product-mix strategies
Tina and Steve also offer more than one product. They effectively have three different 
“products” in their portfolio:
 ∎ Used computers and computer equipment that is in good condition and ready to use.
 ∎ Services relating to the computer, online help, technical support.
 ∎ Development of software that is needed.
While they target both consumers and businesses with the first two “products”, the third 
one is more relevant for businesses that might need some software that is tailored to their 
needs and not yet available.
Other businesses like AT&S mainly target other businesses that need the AT&S products 
for their own production (like Apple for example, which needs AT&S components for pro-
ducing mobile phones). Depending on the application intended by the customer, AT&S has 
developed three different business units with a different range of products:
Expansion
Increasing the 
depth of a line
Increasing the 
number of lines
Mix extensionLine extension
Alteration
Altering existing 
products
Contraction
Eliminating 
products or lines
Product-Mix Strategies