INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS10
Basic economic concepts
per year in such a job, this 35,000 euros would be their opportunity cost per person if they 
decided to set up their own business. If they took these jobs, they would also have oppor-
tunity cost: the amount of money that they could have earned with their business. Of course, 
it would be difficult to tell how much that could have been. Opportunity cost is the (finan-
cial) benefit of the (next best) alternative that is lost or given up in order to choose or 
achieve something else.
2.3 Economics as the study of economic decisions
Economics is the study of how individuals (as part of private households) and busi-
nesses make decisions to satisfy their needs and wants with limited resources.  It 
comprises a number of scientific fields and branches, two of which are microeconomics 
and macroeconomics. Microeconomics focuses on the behaviour and decisions of indi-
vidual households and businesses and how they interact. A question in microeconomics 
could focus on the change in demand of electric cars if buyers of electric cars receive a 
bonus. In contrast, macroeconomics looks at the bigger picture and deals with questions 
concerning the overall economy (of one country for example) and aggregate quantities. 
Among other phenomena, it studies economic growth, unemployment, interest rates, price 
levels and inflation. As a science, economics strives to explain the observed phenomena 
and also to make predictions, both based on various theories.
2.4 Exchanging creates a circular flow and division of labour
While households mainly offer labour and receive wages, businesses offer goods and ser-
vices that are bought by households and other businesses and receive money for what they 
sell (see figure 1). This is how a circular flow of goods, services and money is created. As 
money is used as a means of exchange that is widely used and accepted, these exchanges 
can be carried out relatively easily. Without money, people would have to barter, which is 
much more complicated. If you want to acquire a good from another person, but do not 
have what this person wants in return, there will be no exchange. Money allows for a 
 ∎ flexibility of exchange (first function: medium of exchange). 
It also allows us to express the 
 ∎ value of things (second function: unit of account) and to 
 ∎ store value over time (third function: store of value).
Money fulfils these functions best if its value remains pretty stable over time. However, if 
there is a general rise in prices of goods and services, you can only buy a lower amount 
of goods and services, which means that the purchasing power of money (i.e. its value) 
declines. 
Price indexes allow us to measure the extent of this general increase in prices, a phenom-
enon that is also called inflation. Low inflation rates can be tolerated. The European Cen-
tral Bank considers an inflation rate of slightly below 2% per year most beneficial to the 
economy. But if inflation rates are considerably higher, the purchasing power of money 
decreases considerably. As the amount of goods and services that can be bought for a 
certain amount of money continuously decreases, people lose their trust in money and try 
to get rid of it. 