INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 41
5.7 The marketing mix
A marketing mix is a harmonised blend of several marketing tools that best meets the 
needs and wants of the customers of the targeted market. It consists of the four elements 
product, price, place and promotion – the four Ps – that each comprise several tools. It is 
the basic idea of the marketing mix to provide a good at an affordable price at a convenient 
place and communicate a certain message in order to promote the sale of the product. 
Based on market research
Figure 15. The four elements of the marketing mix
5.7.1 Product
The first P , “Product”, refers to all goods and services that are offered by a business. This 
“P” is always at the heart of marketing and the most important decision of a business. Most 
businesses offer not just one product, but a range of products. Products that are very sim-
ilar (like several slightly different laptop computers) represent a product line. A business 
can produce just one product line (just laptop computers) or different product lines (laptop 
computers, monitors, printers, storage media, and so on).
Brands are created to support product differentia-
tion. A brand consists of a name or a (few) word(s) 
and/or a symbol and/or a sign. It distinguishes a 
product or the business from other products and 
businesses and is intended to build a USP and 
brand recognition as well as brand loyalty. Some 
brands are well known all around the world and 
look the same wherever you find them: the same 
colour, the same font etc.
Brands also serve as a guarantee of stable quality and of a certain level of quality that is 
maintained all over the world. Brands can render trust and safety of choice for a customer. 
For many people it is reassuring to find some brands that they are familiar with when they 
are travelling in foreign countries and feeling uncomfortable or homesick.
Which goods and 
services …
Product
Are sold at 
which price?
Price
Where?
Place
Based on which 
message?
Promotion
Marketing Mix