INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 25
4.2 Partnership
If two or more persons jointly found a business, this business is called a partnership. They 
need to set up a partnership agreement in order to settle the rights and responsibilities as 
well as the division of profits and losses. In a general partnership all partners have equal 
rights, liabilities and responsibilities. They can share the tasks and specialise. In difficult 
situations they can exchange their ideas and (maybe) make better decisions. In Austria, 
this form of business ownership is called “Offene Gesellschaft”, or “OG” in short. Tina and 
Steve’s business is located in Austria and they choose to found such an “Offene Gesell-
schaft”, because they intend to be equally involved in the management of the business and 
share the financial risk. Its firm name is T&S Computer Services OG . They will (have to) 
set up a partnership agreement in which they specify each partner’s percentage of owner-
ship, the division of profit and loss, terms of the partnership, rights and responsibilities, 
decision making and resolving disputes, and other details of the partnership.
Available financial funds for partnerships
In general, the financial aspects of partnerships are similar to those of sole proprietors. 
However, two (or more) partners should possibly be able to invest more savings and raise 
more financial funds than a sole proprietor. It also seems plausible that they can offer more 
(private) assets as collateral for getting a loan. Each of the partners is solely liable for all 
debts of the business (unlimited liability).
In a limited partnership there is at least one partner who is not involved in the management 
of the business and this person’s liability is limited to the amount of money that he or she 
has contributed to the business. This form of business ownership is called “Kommanditge-
sellschaft”, or “KG” in short, in Austria.
4.3 Corporations
Corporations are businesses that are legal entities of their own , which means that they 
have the same rights and obligations as people: legal persons can – just like natural per-
sons – own land and property, hire people, close contracts, sue and be sued. The people 
who found the corporation and own a share of the business need not be involved in the 
management of the business, and the managers need not own a share of the business. 
Corporations are more difficult to set up, but the shareholders’ liability is usually limited to 
the amount of money they invested when buying the shares.
4.3.1 Shareholders are not (necessarily) managers of the business
So if shareholders only provide the money for share capital but are neither obliged nor en-
titled to manage the company, who does? The corporation is managed by the board of 
directors, persons who are elected by the shareholders to make all major business deci-
sions and to represent the shareholders. 
The highest-ranking manager of this board is called the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Other 
board members are the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief 
Information Officer (CIO) or Chief Marketing Officer (CMO). The board of directors of AT&S 
consists of three persons with different tasks and responsibilities (see below).