INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS44
Marketing
Before a product is introduced to the market, there are no sales, so no money is flowing into 
the business. However, there are costs from product development, so the introduction 
phase starts with a loss. After the product launch, the product begins to sell. But costs 
might still be higher than sales because the business needs to spend a lot on promoting 
the product (advertisements, sales events) and introductory prices might be low to attract 
customers. In this phase, the product can be a so-called “question mark”. According to the 
Boston Consulting Group matrix, a product with low relative market share in a market that 
is rapidly growing is a “question mark” (see figure 19). Towards the end of the introduction 
phase, revenues exceed costs and a (small) profit is made.
During the growth period, sales increase more rapidly than costs (average costs might even 
fall due to increased output and economies of scale). As market share increases in a market 
that is still growing, the product may become a “star”. Stars are very valuable to busi-
nesses because of their strong market position. In order to maintain this position, busi-
nesses need to invest money in promotion and in production facilities. Usually, the busi-
ness finally makes a profit in the growth stage that peaks in the maturity stage. 
As soon as the market is not growing that fast anymore, but market share is still high, the 
product becomes a “cash cow”. Businesses usually do not invest so much money anymore 
because market growth has become low. So revenues are (still) high but expenses decrease.
However, profits will – sooner or later – tend to fall again due to increased competition, which 
often causes lower prices and higher costs (for promoting the product). The product more and 
more becomes a “poor dog” as it nears the decline stage. Sales fall (sometimes even rapidly) 
and so do profits. Market growth is low and market share might also be relatively low.
The product life cycle varies enormously in duration across product categories. The matu-
rity stage can take months or years – some products like detergents, toothpaste or per-
fumes seem to have an indefinite maturity phase. Other products (“fads”) have a very short 
life cycle and have to be withdrawn after less than a year.
High
Market 
growth
Low
STARS QUESTION MARKS
CASH COWS POOR DOGS
High Low
Relative market share
Figure 19. The Boston Consulting Group matrix
????