INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS46
Marketing
Market penetration, in the upper left quadrant in figure 20, is the safest of the four options. 
Adopting this strategy, a business focuses on expanding sales of the existing product(s), 
e.g. ice cream, in the existing market. This can be achieved by improving the product (e.g. 
enhancing the flavour), by promoting it in new ways (e.g. new TV adverts), by using addi-
tional distribution channels or by increasing sales personnel. This is a low-risk strategy, 
because the business knows the product and the market.
Product development, in the lower left quadrant, is slightly riskier, because the business 
needs to introduce a new product into the existing mark et (a new flavour of ice cream or 
other products like cookies and chocolate). This will only make sense if a problem has been 
identified that cannot be solved with the existing product(s).
With market development, in the upper right quadrant, an existing product is put into an 
entirely new market. Businesses identify new target groups that might also find the product 
useful. Maybe a new use for the product can be found or some additional features or ben-
efits can be added.
Diversification, in the lower right quadrant, is the riskiest of the four options. Not only is the 
product new but so is the market – two unknown variables at once. However, diversification 
can also be adopted in order to reduce risk in the long run. With more than just one product 
line that targets more than one segment of the market, a business can make sure that even 
if one product line suffers losses the other one(s) might still be profitable.
5.7.2 Price
The second P , “Price”, is also crucial and difficult to determine. Once a price has been set, 
it is very hard to change the pricing strategy because that would confuse customers. The 
lowest possible price is not always the safest choice to appeal to customers. The main in-
fluencing factors are: 
 ∎ Costs, because costs need to be covered and – possibly – some profit gained. The ap-
proach of setting a price on the basis of cost is called cost-based pricing. 
 ∎ The prices charged by the competition (because if the product is not superior or differ-
ent to similar products of the competitors it will be impossible to explain a higher price). 
 ∎ Demand, because it is also important to consider how much customers are willing to 
pay. If demand is high, a higher price can be set.
Cost-based pricing
In the long run, all businesses need to cover their total cost if they want to survive. Total 
costs comprise fixed costs and variable costs. Variable costs increase directly as output 
rises (the more computers sold and the more technical problems of clients solved the high-
er the variable costs are). Fixed costs are independent of the output, like the rent or insur-
ance for the office. As soon as revenues exceed total cost, the business “breaks even”. The 
output that needs to be sold in order to “break even” is also called the “break-even point”. 
Figure 21 shows this concept with a simplified example. Let’s assume Tina and Steve of-
fered just one product (e.g. a certain type of laptop with certain specifications) that causes 
variable costs of 480 euros and can be sold for 720 euros. Fixed costs amount to 130,000 
euros (independent of the output that is produced). Figure 21 shows fixed costs, variable 
costs, total costs and revenues for different levels of output of that laptop.