INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 27
that it will increase market share and/or successfully introduce a new product. Demand for 
shares is also influenced by economic indicators like economic growth, interest rates and 
inflation. Usually there is higher demand for shares when the economy is thriving (because 
many people have money to invest), with comparatively higher rates of inflation (because 
share prices would also increase) and comparatively low interest rates (because high inter-
est rates would make other investments more attractive). Please note that an increase in 
share prices after they have been issued does not have any additional financing effect for 
the issuing corporation. The beneficiaries of this increase are the shareholders only.
Among the biggest and most well-known stock markets of the world are the New York 
Stock Exchange (NYSE), Nasdaq Inc. in New York, London Stock Exchange (LSE), Tokyo 
Stock Exchange, Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, and Shanghai Stock Exchange. Apart 
from the LSE, the most important stock exchanges in Europe are the Deutsche Börse  in 
Frankfurt, the NYSE Euronext (Europe), the SIX Swiss Exchange (Geneva, Basel and Zurich), 
Borsa Italiana in Milan, and the Spanish Exchange.
There are many reasons why people invest in shares. The most important reasons are: 
 ∎ The intent to provide money for a business they believe in and want to support finan-
cially.
 ∎ Annual income: The wish to get dividends in return; dividends are (part of the) profits 
of the corporation that are paid to the shareholders. There is no obligation for a cor-
poration to do so, but if no dividends are paid over a longer period of time, the shares 
might become unattractive for investors and decreasing demand might lead to falling 
share prices.
 ∎ Capital growth: The hope that share prices will rise and the shares can be sold at a 
higher price than they were bought at.
 ∎ The wish to go to the annual stockholders’ meeting and have the chance to vote and 
influence some business decisions (because common stock includes the right to vote 
at the stockholders’ meeting). Shareholders of preferred shares of stock do not have 
this right but earn a higher dividend.
 ∎ That an investment in shares represents an investment in real values  that will not 
lose its value so easily even in times of high inflation.
In some English-speaking countries, the public limited company (PLC) is one type of such 
a corporation. The term PLC is more commonly used in the United Kingdom and some Com-
monwealth countries. In the USA and other countries, you would rather find the denomina-
tion “Inc.”, which stands for “Incorporated”, or “Ltd” for “Limited”. In German-speaking 
countries this form of legal structure for a business is called “Aktiengesellschaft” (abbrevi-
ated AG) as “Aktien” means “shares” and “Gesellschaft” stands for “corporation”. The min-
imum capital requirement for founding an AG is 70,000 euros, which is the main reason why 
Tina and Steve do not consider an AG the appropriate legal structure for their business.
Another type of corporation is the European Company (SE, société européenne). It is sim-
ilar to an “Aktiengesellschaft” or PLC governed by Community law directly applicable in all 
– and only in – member states of the European Union.
AT&S is an “Aktiengesellschaft” according to Austrian law, and the shares were initially 
listed on the Neuer Markt of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in July 1999. In spring 2008, 
AT&S decided to switch to the home stock exchange in Vienna. AT&S has been quoted in 