INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 33
solve customers’ problems and fulfil their wishes and needs. Benefits for the customer may 
be the functionalities of the product but also some additional features, the image that it 
conveys and the joy it gives to its user.
A mobile phone creates value for example, because you can reach your family and friends 
from wherever you are (so it creates value through functionalities), and you can also receive 
emails, messages and surf online (additional features). If you buy the latest model of a 
certain mobile phone with lots of additional functionalities, everyone thinks you are an ex-
pert in the field and that makes you happy.
5.1 What a product is
In marketing terminology, a product is every good and/or service that can be exchanged 
in order to fulfil the wishes and needs of customers. Customers can be either other 
businesses or consumers (private households). Producer products are goods and services 
that are sold from one business to another (business-to-business, B2B), while consumer 
products are sold to consumers or private households (business-to-consumer, B2C). If 
Steve and Tina buy a printer for their office, it is a producer product. If the exact same 
printer is not used in their office but in their private homes, it is a consumer product. Tina 
and Steve offer computer support services, mainly to private households (B2C), but also to 
other businesses (B2B).
5.2 Objectives of marketing
In order to fulfil customers’ wishes and needs, a business has to analyse the market(s) it 
wants to operate in and be clear about its marketing objectives. They may include but are 
not limited to: 
 ∎ Customer satisfaction: If customers are not satisfied with the product, they will not 
buy it (again). Satisfied customers often become loyal customers who will possibly buy 
the product again. This is why this objective is interrelated with the other ones.
 ∎ Creating a unique selling proposition (USP): If a product has a USP , it is or is consid-
ered to be – in one way or another – different from other similar products. This is also 
called product differentiation and can be based on a certain characteristic of the prod-
uct or to the way it is promoted and perceived by customers. Building a brand supports 
creating a USP . The product is or seems to be “special” or “unique” or “better than the 
rest”. A business is interested in creating a USP for its product(s) because this helps to 
attract many loyal customers.
 ∎ Gaining and maintaining market share: Businesses will be interested in having a cer-
tain share of the market – it indicates their relative importance in the market compared 
to their competitors’ positions. It is therefore an indicator of competitiveness. 
 ∎ Maintaining or increasing sales: Sales are important to businesses because they 
need the revenues to cover the production costs and to make a profit,
 ∎ Profitability: Usually the higher the sales figures are, the more profit a business will 
make (with certain limitations). Profits are important because they reimburse the own-
ers for the invested money and they can be retained and reinvested in the business.