INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS26
Forms of business ownership and sources of finance
a) Andreas Gerstenmayer is Chairman of the Management Board (CEO) 
and responsible for
 ∎ Sales/marketing
 ∎ Investor Relations/Public Relations/
Internal Communication
 ∎ Purchasing
 ∎ Business Development  Strategy
 ∎ Compliance
b) Monika Stoisser-Göhring is Deputy Chairwoman of the Management Board 
and as SFO responsible for
 ∎ Finance and Accounting
 ∎ Controlling
 ∎ Human Resources incl. CSR
 ∎ Legal & Internal Audit
 ∎ IT & Tools
c) Heinz Moitzi is COO and responsible for:
 ∎ Research & Development (R&D)
 ∎ Maintenance
 ∎ Production
 ∎ Quality Assurance
 ∎ Supply and Disposal
 ∎ Quality Management
 ∎ Business Process Excellence
 ∎ Environment & Sustainability
 ∎ Safety
Source: AT&S annual report 2017/18. The board of directors of AT&S, p. 11.
4.3.2 Available financial funds for corporations
Corporations usually have more options to raise financial funds than sole proprietors and 
partnerships. Their financial funds mainly comprise share capital as well as loans and 
credit. 
Share capital
The capital of a corporation is divided into shares, which is why it is called share capital. If 
share capital equals 1,000,000 euros and is divided by 100,000 shares, each share (also 
called stock) represents 10 euros or 0.001 per cent of the share capital. Persons who buy 
shares become shareholders. Shares can be bought either at the time they are initially is-
sued by the corporation or later on from some other shareholder who sells his shares. If all 
100,000 shares are actually sold, the corporation gains 1,000,000 euros as share capital. 
This example shows that huge amounts of money can be raised from the sale of shares. 
The share capital of AT&S for example equals 141,846,000 euros. Share capital is usually 
not redeemed by the company. It is long-term capital or even permanent capital.
A corporation’s stock can but does not have to be listed on a stock market or stock ex-
change. A stock exchange is a financial market, regulated by the authorities, where shares 
and other securities (e.g. bonds) can be easily bought and sold by lots of people and busi-
nesses. The corporations that want their shares to be listed have to comply with certain 
rules and fulfil listing requirements. The shares are introduced on the stock exchange at a 
certain price (this introduction is also called initial public offering (IPO)) and then the prices 
are determined by demand and supply. According to the laws of supply and demand, usu-
ally the prices go up if demand for shares is high and vice versa. There are a lot of reasons 
why demand for shares of a corporation can change: rising demand can be due to people’s 
expectations that the business is doing well, that it will make profits in the (near) future, 