INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 55
6.2.1 Profit and loss account
The profit and loss account is needed to determine whether a business has made a profit 
or a loss over a certain period of time. While the balance sheet contains the assets, liabili-
ties and equity as of a certain day, all the revenues, costs and expenses that occur during 
a time period (e.g. a year) are summarised in the profit and loss account, which is also 
called income statement. 
Revenues are the income (usually cash or accounts receivable) that is generated from sell-
ing goods or services to customers. Costs consist of resources that are consumed in order 
to produce the goods or provide the services.
If the revenues exceed the costs and expenses, the company has a profit. If the company’s 
costs and expenses are higher than the revenue, it suffers a loss. Let’s assume that the 
2018 income statement of T&S Computer Services OG contains 
 ∎ sales revenue of €400,000 and 
 ∎ costs and expenses (like material, wages, rent, energy, depreciation*) and other ex-
penses) of €310,000, then the difference would be a profit of €90,000.
*) Depreciation
Fixed assets are used again and again over a longer period of time. Tina’s car for example 
will be used for at least five more years. Steve’s new computer will be used for three years. 
During that time, the value of these assets decreases ; it is “used up”. Recognising this 
effect is called depreciation. Without depreciation, the values of assets that are shown in 
the accounts would be inaccurate. The value of the assets in the balance sheet would be 
overstated and the financial information given would be flawed.
Steve paid 2,100 euros for his computer and will use it for around three years (so three 
years is the “expected useful life” of the computer). Therefore, depreciation equals 700 
euros per year (using the straight line method to calculate depreciation). After the first year, 
the book value of this computer will be 1,400 euros (2,100 − 700) in the balance sheet, 700 
euros after the second year and 0 euros after the third year.
AT&S describes its depreciation method in the annual report: “From the time of their avail-
ability for use, the assets are depreciated on a straight line basis over their expected useful 
lives. (…) Land is not subject to depreciation. Scheduled depreciation is based on the fol-
lowing useful lives: plants and buildings 10-50 years, machinery and technical equipment 
4-15 years, tools, fixtures, furniture and office equipment 3-15 years.”
As depreciation represents an asset’s loss in value, it is recognised as an expense included 
in the income statement that reduces the (gross) profit, just like other expenses (wages for 
administration, staff, rent, energy, insurance) do. The main difference to other expenses like 
energy, heating or wages is the fact that depreciation does not cause an actual payment.
Profits and losses cannot only be seen in the income statement
At the end of 2018, Tina and Steve draw up another balance sheet to see how their assets 
and capital structure have changed over the first year of business. Due to depreciation, the 
loss of value of their fixed assets, their initial office equipment and the car have a lower 
value than one year before. As they have bought some more office equipment over the year, 
the position has risen to 42,000 euros. Their inventory has increased, but they try to keep 