INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 61
6.5 Analysis of financial statements
The information given in the balance sheet and in the income statement can be used to 
calculate figures and ratios in order to learn more, e.g. about the
 ∎ liquidity (or the solvency) of a business,
 ∎ profitability, which refers to the relationship of profit to the capital employed or to 
the turnover,
 ∎ financial efficiency, which deals with the question how effectively a business has 
employed its resources and
 ∎ financial structure, which can be evaluated on the basis of equity ratio (equity in per 
cent of total assets) and debt ratio (total debt in per cent of total assets).
Please note: Since these figures and ratios can vary a lot from one industry to another, 
some comparisons would not be very meaningful. Comparisons are meaningful for differ-
ent businesses within the same industry or sector or for one single business over time 
(comparisons of several different financial years).
There might also be different ways to calculate some of these ratios, so it is always impor-
tant to know how ratios were calculated if you want to make comparisons.
6.5.1 Liquidity
The term liquidity refers to the ability of a business to pay its bills and repay its debts on 
time. One approach to evaluate liquidity is to calculate the working capital of a business. 
Working capital (or circulating capital) indicates whether or not a business is able to pay its 
day-to-day bills such as electricity, rent and wages and buy components for its production. 
Therefore, the focus is on short-term assets and liabilities.
Working capital = current assets – current liabilities
The calculation of working capital is based on the idea that current assets of a business are 
relatively liquid (meaning that they can be easily turned into cash). Current assets comprise 
cash itself, inventory and accounts receivable. If all the current assets are turned into cash 
to repay current liabilities, working capital is the amount that is left over after all current 
debts have been paid. 
Working capital for AT&S in the financial year 2017/18:
586,172 – 303,772 = 282,400 (thousand euros)
Working capital should be positive, meaning that current assets should be higher than cur-
rent liabilities. If they are not, this would indicate that part of the non-current assets was 
financed by short-term liabilities, which might cause problems when these liabilities need 
to be repaid. A low level of working capital might also indicate that there is not enough cash 
or the business has borrowed too much through trade credit. Businesses that need a lot of 
inventory (like retailers) are likely to have higher levels of working capital than businesses 
that provide services (like a hairdresser or a business coach).
A high level of inventory can be important to a business in order to satisfy customers’ needs 
very quickly, but keeping inventories also has downsides for the business. First of all, it 
takes space, but it is also risky. Unused inventory ties up money in a business; it might be-
come obsolete and lose its value.