INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 53
Assets (euros) Liabilities and equity (euros)
Office equipment including 
computers 25,000 Owner’s equity (capital) 24,000
Car 8,000
Inventory 12,500 Bank loan ( liabilities) 25,000
Cash and bank deposit 3,500
49,000 49,000
A balance sheet comprises a company’s assets and reveals how they were financed. 
The amount of assets equals the amount of liabilities plus owner’s equity:
assets = liabilities + owner’s equity
This must be an equation because 
 ∎ all assets were funded either through equity or liabilities, 
 ∎ all funds are somehow bound or invested in the business (even money held as cash 
or in a bank account was either funded through equity or liabilities and is bound in the 
specific form it is currently held) and
 ∎ any increase in assets must be financed by an increase in either liabilities or equity 
(capital). 
Please note that if Tina and Steve buy computer software and pay cash, the total amount 
of the assets remains the same (one asset – software – increases, but another one – cash 
– decreases by the exact same amount, so it is just an “asset swap”). But if they buy the 
software on credit, then the amount of assets increases and liabilities also increase by the 
exact same amount. Accordingly, the balance sheet total increases.
Assets are usually listed in the balance sheet in a certain order. They comprise fixed assets 
(or non-current assets) that normally have a lifespan of more than one year and are in-
tended to be used in the company for a longer time period than one year. Usually they can-
not be turned into cash so easily. Current assets have higher liquidity. They are usually not 
used longer than a year because they are used up, spent in production or sold.
Examples of fixed assets / non-current assets are property, plant, premises, buildings, 
machinery and all kind of equipment like office equipment, e.g. computers that are used in 
the office. Also financial assets – if meant to be kept longer than a year – can be fixed or 
non-current assets.
Examples of current assets  are inventory (merchandise that has not been sold yet, like 
computers in stock), accounts receivables / debtors (money that is owed to the business, 
also called trade receivables), cash.
There are also intangible assets like trademarks, patents and copyrights. Although they 
cannot be seen or touched they are also of value for the business like tangible assets are. 
Tina and Steve do not have any intangible assets (yet), but the AT&S balance sheet (see 
below) contains intangible assets of almost 76 million euros, mainly acquired patents, 
trademarks and licenses.