INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 35
5.4 The need for more responsibility and sustainability
It is often claimed that businesses not only focus on what customers need or want, but that 
they also create wishes and needs by continuously developing new products and advertis-
ing them, sometimes even in unethical ways. The fact is that many people spend more 
money than they can afford to or at least more than they initially intended to spend. They 
buy things that they do not really need and will not use (or just for a very short period of 
time). Therefore, it seems desirable that both businesses and consumers become more 
aware of the importance of sustainable production and consumption and realise the poten-
tial risks of consuming too much. Both businesses and consumers need to act in a more 
responsible and sustainable way. Tina and Steve hope to contribute to sustainability with 
their business. Computers should be used longer and not immediately replaced if a prob-
lem occurs, but repaired and reused. There are similar tendencies in the market for clothes. 
More and more people no longer want to buy cheap clothes that are thrown away after a 
few months. They prefer high-quality clothes that they can give to their friends and might 
get some other good clothes in return. Renting high-quality clothes is another trend. In-
stead of buying (cheap) clothes for a particular event you rent clothes of higher quality and 
return them afterwards.
5.5 Market research
Market research provides information about existing and prospective customers of a busi-
ness, the (potential) buyers of its product(s), about the competition, and the industry in 
general. This information, the research data, can be based on two sources.
5.5.1 Primary sources
Primary information is gained by conducting an empirical study or having data collected by 
a market research institute. This study can be tailored to the needs and interests of the 
business. A business might be interested to know who their customers are, which products 
they buy, what they think about these products, if they also buy similar products of other 
businesses. Steve and Tina for example would love to know more about their prospective 
customers: which computers do they need/want? How much are they willing to pay for 
laptops? How much and which kind of support do they need? And do men and women, 
older and younger users differ in their answers to these questions? 
But conducting a study can be very costly: administering hundreds or thousands of ques-
tionnaires, conducting personal or telephone interviews, setting up an online survey, ana-
lysing and interpreting the data costs a lot. Especially small businesses often cannot afford 
this sort of market research.
5.5.2 Secondary sources
Secondary information is based on existing research that has already been done by some-
body else (and maybe for some other purpose). Government agencies, trade and/or indus-
try associations or other businesses often conduct research that is available free of charge 
and might also serve the purpose of learning more about the market. However, in most 
cases, the information will be very general and not tailored to the specific interests of a 
business.