INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS60
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
Please note: 
Cost of sales (COS) (or cost of goods sold (COGS)) are the costs that are directly tied to the 
production of the products like the cost of labour (that is directly linked to production), ma-
terials and manufacturing overhead. For example, the COGS for a manufacturer of PCBs 
includes the material costs for the elements that are used for making PCBs and the labour 
costs for putting the PCBs together. Administration costs, the cost of shipping the PCBs to 
customers or the cost of sales personnel is NOT included in COGS.
Gross profit reveals the earnings of a business after deducting the direct costs of producing 
the goods (without operating expenses). Therefore, it focuses on the financial performance 
of revenue from production only. There is another metric that allows us to analyse operating 
performance while including operating expenses: earnings before interest, taxes, depre-
ciation and amortisation (EBITDA). By deducting depreciation and amortisation, the next 
metric for earnings of a business is gained: earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT).
In accounting, expenditures and expenses are not the same. While expenditures are pay-
ments that are either made to purchase (non-current as well as current) assets, expenses are 
costs that have expired or were “used up” in order to produce the goods or provide the ser-
vices that were sold. For example, COGS are considered to be expenses, and so are other 
expenses such as salaries, marketing costs, interest, insurance, rent, and so on.
Answer to question 4: Revenues have increased by about 176,937,000 euros, which is 
an increase of 21.7% compared to revenues of the financial year 2016/17. Most inter-
estingly, the cost of sales has only increased by around 9.1% (69,367 / 760,172 * 100).
Answer to question 5: Gross profit has significantly increased (actually, it has more 
than tripled). The operating result has improved even more; it has reached almost 14 
times the amount of the previous financial year.
6.4 Use of these accounts – types of accounting
These accounts are needed for a number of stakeholders who are interested in the financial 
situation of a business. Some of them are internal users like the owners of the business, the 
managers and the employees. They are all interested to learn if the business is thriving. Man-
agers need to make decisions based on financial information (like “Do we need to cut costs in 
marketing?”) and owners will want to know if their investment is worth the risk (like “How much 
profit do I get in return for investing and risking my money?”). There are also external users of 
financial information like tax authorities, suppliers, competitors, investors and the media. 
For some companies it is mandatory to have their accounts checked for authenticity by an 
independent firm of accountants, an auditing company. This task is called auditing. The 
result of the auditing process can be read in the annual report.
Managerial accounting focuses on providing information for the management of the busi-
ness. Based on the data gained from managerial accounting, managers are able to make 
decisions like where to cut costs and how to calculate prices. Of course, managers are also 
interested in financial accounting, something that is also of interest for decision makers 
outside a business like tax authorities or banks. Information gained from financial account-
ing like the balance sheet and the income statement can be found in the annual reports for 
example. Many large businesses also publish selected information on their financials on 
their websites.