INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS62
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
Working capital problems and cash flow problems are interlinked but not identical. Cash 
flow problems can be mitigated by borrowing money using a short-term bank loan or using 
overdraft facilities and trade credit. Although this brings cash into the business, it will in-
crease current liabilities and reduce working capital. The most effective way to improve 
both working capital and cash flow is to increase equity or borrow more long-term credit.
Working capital can also be calculated as a ratio:
Working capital ratio / current ratio = Current assets / current liabilities 
As current assets should exceed current liabilities, this ratio should be greater than 1, ide-
ally even between 1.5 and 2.
Working capital ratio for AT&S = 586,172 / 303,772 = 1.9
It can be argued that inventories should not be taken into consideration for this calculation. 
There are many reasons why inventories could possibly not be turned into cash. This is why 
a modified calculation, the so-called acid test ratio, does not consider inventories and al-
lows a stricter evaluation of liquidity.
Acid test ratio = (current assets – inventory) / current liabilities
Acid test ratio for AT&S = (586,172 – 136,097) / 303,772 = 1.5
So the result of the acid test ratio for AT&S is still greater than 1, which indicates a sufficient 
level of liquidity.
6.5.2 Profitability
If revenues exceed costs, the business makes a profit. This does not necessarily mean that 
the business is sufficiently profitable because the amount of profit might be minuscule in 
relation to the money that has been invested (and the risk that has been taken). Hence, 
profitability refers to a business’s profit in relation to an indicator of the size of the business 
(total assets or total average assets, total equity, turnover). 
 ∎ Return on equity
ROE = profit before tax and interest (EBIT) / equity
AT&S: 90,286 / 711,391 = 12.7%
Another ratio that is often calculated is return on capital employed (ROCE). Capital em-
ployed is usually the sum of equity and non-current liabilities (or simply assets minus cur-
rent liabilities). Instead of capital employed at the end of the financial year, the average 
capital employed can be used (e.g. by summing up capital employed at the beginning and 
at the end of the financial year and dividing by 2).