INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS16
Basic economic concepts
Supply and demand for money 
Please note that the laws of supply and demand also help to understand one of the main 
causes of inflation. If the quantity of money within a country is increased (in order to stim-
ulate the economy), people and businesses are able to buy more and to invest, so demand 
for goods and services usually rises. If the quantity of available goods and services in this 
country remains the same and does not increase accordingly, then the prices for goods and 
services will rise. “Too many dollars chasing too few goods” expresses very well what infla-
tion is about. It is by increasing the price for money, i.e. the interest rates, that inflation can 
be fought. If it is more expensive to borrow money, people and businesses tend to spend 
less, demand for goods and services decreases again and so do their prices.
2.7 Competition in the market
The level of competition in a market is mainly influenced by the number of suppliers and 
the availability of substitute goods. If there is just one supplier, the market situation is 
called a monopoly. Monopolies are rare in a market economy but there might be goods and 
services that are only provided by one business (like the railway in some countries).
Some businesses might not be the sole suppliers in the whole market, but they might be 
the only supplier within a certain area, which also makes them a kind of monopolist. The 
owners of a ski hut might be in a monopoly-like situation if they are the only ones to offer 
food and beverages on a particular mountain. A theatre bar is in a similar situation. Tina 
and Steve could find themselves in such a situation if they are the only ones that offer such 
a service within a radius of 50 km for example. 
If there are a few suppliers, the market form is called an oligopoly. Each supplier has a 
relatively large share of the market (e.g. telecom companies, car manufacturers). Competi-
tion can be strong, because as soon as one supplier changes the product or the price, its 
competitors are very likely to react in order to maintain their share of the market. Alterna-
tively, suppliers could try to negotiate their terms of sale in order to prevent such harmful 
competition. Such agreements – also called a cartel – are usually not considered legal. In 
general, laws support competition in a market because it is considered beneficial for cus-
tomers.
Perfect competition can (theoretically) be found in markets with so many suppliers and 
buyers that no single individual or business can possibly influence the price. Considering 
perfect competition, in economics we also assume the following (theoretical) prerequisites:
 ∎ All market players (buyers and sellers) must have access to all information at all times.
 ∎ There must not be any barriers to enter or exit the market.
 ∎ There must not be any (personal) preferences – i.e. goods, as mentioned, must be re-
placeable.
In real life, perfect competition is rarely found but, nevertheless, some markets come close 
to the concept of perfect competition. These are markets for goods and/or services that are 
almost identical (regardless of the supplier), e.g. agricultural markets, or that can be stan-
dardised. Even if the number of suppliers is not so high, competition can be almost “per-
fect” if competition among suppliers is especially fierce.