INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS12
Basic economic concepts
financial transactions or on managing human resources. Accordingly, these (different) 
tasks of a business are often summarised in different departments of a business: pro-
curement, production, sales department, marketing, finance and accounting.
 ∎ Specialisation can also be found between businesses as every business focuses on a 
special range of products: some offer all kinds of furniture, others just beds and couch-
es, some others just produce kitchens. These businesses operate on the same level of 
production. But specialisation can also be based on division of labour between busi-
nesses on different levels of production (first level: production of wood and iron, sec-
ond level: production of boards and nails, third level: production of tables, final level: 
selling them) or in different sectors of the economy (see chapter 3).
 ∎ Specialisation can also be found on an international level,  as countries differ in cli-
mate, natural resources, geographical position and many other characteristics. Due 
to very different characteristics, countries also differ in their conditions for different 
industries (industry being a number of businesses that produce or sell the same prod-
uct) and different business functions. AT&S for example has production sites in Europe 
as well as in Asia (China, India and South Korea). While production in Europe is highly 
diversified and relatively low in volume, production in Asia reaches a much higher vol-
ume but has a lower product diversity. This kind of division of labour can be explained 
by differences in terms of know-how of the workforce, labour costs, availability of other 
resources and the legal framework in different countries.
While division of labour has many advantages, it also has some disadvantages that need 
to be considered: for very specialised workers, work may become boring over time. Being 
specialised also means less flexibility as it is hard to develop other skills or develop com-
petencies in other fields. A specialised business may be brilliant in that field, but if – for 
some reason – that specialisation is not needed anymore, the business is at risk and peo-
ple could lose their jobs.
2.5 Different economic systems
The role of governments described above is mainly true for the governments in some sort 
of market economy. While in market economies individuals and businesses are – more or 
less – allowed to make many of their own economic decisions, in planned economic sys-
tems the governments play a dominant role. They (mainly or partly) decide which goods 
are produced and which services are offered (at which prices). Furthermore, they (mainly or 
partly) control the resources and the means of production. People have a limited choice of 
which job to do and which products to buy.
In most countries of the world, economies can be characterised as some kind of market 
economy. In some of these countries, the governments play a minor role by only providing 
the legal framework and not influencing the economy much, so their economic system 
comes close to what is called a “free market economy”. In many other countries, the gov-
ernment plays a more important role by influencing the economy to a somewhat higher 
extent, by supporting the poor and protecting the environment for example. These systems 
are called “social market economies” or “eco-social market economies”. 
Over the past decades, a lot of former communist countries that used to have planned 
economic systems have adopted the main principles of the market economy. Many Central 
and Eastern European Countries (CEE), China and former Soviet countries are examples of 
such a transformation. 