INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS32
Marketing
5 Marketing
Producing a good or providing a service only makes sense if there are enough people who are 
interested in the good or service and ask for it. It is not only businesses that seek to make a 
profit that need sufficient demand for their goods and services. Non-profit organisations can 
also only exist over a longer period of time if their goods and services meet a demand. There-
fore, “having a market” and knowing the market is highly important to all kinds of businesses. 
Marketing activities intend to achieve this goal. They also intend to tailor the products to 
customers’ needs and wishes and to continuously improve the product.
Critics say that marketing, especially 
promotion, influences many people to 
buy more than they actually need or 
can afford. By continuously innovating 
products, businesses contribute to the 
obsolescence of existing products, 
which leads to more and more con-
sumption. In some cases, marketing 
creates desires that people would not 
otherwise have had.
People who are less critical have a 
similar understanding of the term 
“marketing”. They say that a business 
has “good marketing” if they like the TV 
adverts or the display of products in a 
shop. However, marketing is much 
more than good advertising, although 
this is the most visible part of market-
ing. What is marketing all about?
There is no single, universally accepted definition of marketing. According to the American 
Marketing Association, marketing is “the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creat-
ing, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, cli-
ents, partners, and society at large” (www.ama.org). Other definitions have adopted a very 
similar approach. They describe marketing as an ongoing management process that aims at
 ∎ identifying the (potential) customers’ needs and wants, 
 ∎ developing the product(s) and the product features accordingly and 
 ∎ communicating the products and their benefits to the (potential) customers 
 ∎ at a price that consumers are willing to pay and 
 ∎ made available to them through a distribution network. 
Some consider it even more than a management process – in their eyes, it is a philosophy 
that is present in the whole business. Either way, marketing is about creating value for 
the customer. It is based on the analysis of the strengths of a business and its know-how 
that is put into the development of its products. It also requires a thorough analysis of the 
market and the wishes and needs of (potential) customers in order to offer products that 