--- book p.18 / pdf 16 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS18
Focus on different types of businesses
The tertiary sector comprises the 
service industry, like distribution, 
banking, insurance, coaching etc. 
Tina and Steve offer services: they 
trade goods, develop software and 
provide technical support.
The more the economic development of a country advances, the more important the third 
sector becomes. In economically highly developed countries, like EU countries with a high 
gross domestic product (GDP) per capita (indicating a high standard of living), the ter-
tiary sector usually accounts for more than 70% of the output of the economy, while the 
primary sector – as important as it may be for providing food – only accounts for a small 
percentage of the output of the economy. 
Please note that GDP is the total monetary value of final goods and services that are 
produced within a country’s borders in a certain time period (usually a year). Therefore, 
it is considered to measure the overall economic activity of a country. GDP is also used 
as an indicator for economic growth: if GDP (adjusted for inflation) increases over time, the 
economy is growing. However, the use of GDP is not undisputed. Critics say that not all 
sources of income are taken into account. What is more, GDP does not tell anything about 
the quality and/or sustainability of growth, nor is it a perfect indicator of economic well-
being in a country. For example, GDP would also increase after ecological disasters that 
require action to rebuild infrastructure and to mitigate the damage. However, GDP is usu-
ally correlated to some indicators of well-being like health status and happiness.
3.3 Businesses can be profit-oriented or not-for-profit
Most businesses aim to operate for a longer time period. In order to do so and to thrive over 
time, most businesses aim to make a profit, i.e. they intend to have higher revenues than 
costs and expenses. Profits are important to the business itself because they can be rein-
vested in the business, which enhances the durability and sustainability of the business. 
Of course, profits are also important to the owners and investors because the profits are 
their reward for the risk they have taken. 
However, there are also businesses (or organisations) that are not-for-profit and mainly aim 
to cover their costs. Nevertheless, they also need to achieve a certain level of revenues (or in 
many cases: donations) in order to be able to offer their goods and services. Any profit they 
make is also beneficial to the organisation, because it can be reinvested and used to enhance 
the services for customers or to engage in more projects. The Red Cross, the World Wildlife 
Fund or Greenpeace are examples of such non-profit organisations (NPOs).

--- book p.19 / pdf 17 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 19
3.4 Businesses come “in all sizes”, large and small
There is an enormous variety of businesses: micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME 
or just SME) as well as large businesses. About 99% of all businesses in the EU are SMEs. 
The European Commission differentiates between these types of businesses (see http://
ec.europa.eu) as presented in table 1.
Company category Staff headcount Turnover OR Balance sheet total
Micro < 10 ≤ €2 m ≤ €2 m
Small < 50 ≤ €10 m ≤ €10 m
Medium-sized < 250 ≤ €50 m ≤ €43 m
Table 1. Size categories of businesses
The definition of an SME is important for access to finance and EU support programmes 
targeted specifically at these enterprises. Tina and Steve have a micro company; even if 
they hire two assistants, they are still a micro company. AT&S on the other hand, with about 
10,000 employees, is a large company.
The size of a business is also relevant in terms of legal requirements for their accounting 
(see chapter 6, Accounting). In many countries, small businesses are allowed to use sim-
pler accounting methods in order to calculate their profits or losses.
3.5 Businesses may be local, national or international
A local (or regional) business operates in a small, limited area. Most customers live very 
close to the business. They do not serve a national or international market. Tina’s and 
Steve’s business would be such a local business, at least at the beginning. The most im-
portant challenge of (small) local businesses is to have sufficient financial funds and to 
acquire a substantial number of customers. Many business owners face the difficulties of 
undercapitalisation: their own funds are limited and it is very hard for them to access ad-
ditional funding.
A national business serves the home market (the market within a country), but not the in-
ternational market. An insurance company or a bakery that operates all over Austria, but 
not abroad, is a national business. Like a local business, it has to choose a suitable loca-
tion. Additionally, it has to decide how to deliver its goods and services to other places 
within the country. The supply chain is much longer.
International (or multinational) businesses make and/or sell their goods and services in 
more than one country. As the home market might be limited and too small for some com-
panies, they strive to serve a larger market. A larger, international market brings along a 
number of challenges: an even longer supply chain, different legal and economic systems, 
different cultures and languages, maybe also different currencies. As the number of multi-
national businesses has increased over time, the world has become globalised and we 
have experienced globalisation. AT&S is an international business that has production 
plants in Asian countries as well as in Austria and that sells its goods to other businesses 
all over the world.

--- book p.20 / pdf 18 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS20
Focus on different types of businesses
3.6 Businesses operate in an environment – stakeholders are 
important
There is one thing that all businesses have in common: they are always integrated into an 
environment in which they operate. Therefore, they deal with many other people and/or 
businesses and need to consider their interests as well. Everyone that is (potentially) af-
fected by the activities of a business and/or has an interest in what a business does 
is a stakeholder. Due to globalisation, the world has become a smaller place and the 
number of stakeholders has grown considerably. Furthermore, people are more environ-
mentally conscious and expect businesses to preserve and protect the environment. The 
most important stakeholders of a business are shown in figure 5.
Figure 5. Stakeholders of a business
The owners of a business are stakeholders because they have invested their money in the 
business and want their investment to pay off. The y want to make a profit in order to get 
something in return for the risk they have taken. They also profit from the increase in value 
of a business if the business operates successfully on the market. This increase is usually 
reflected in the price of shares of this business. It can be earned by selling the shares or 
the whole business (for example, the company Runtastic GmbH was bought by Adidas for 
220 million euros). Making a profit may be one, but does not have to be the only goal of the 
owner(s) of a business. Solving a problem, contributing to a solution to a problem that cus-
tomers have (such as computer problems), and making a contribution to the welfare of 
society may also be important. Tina and Steve create value for their customers and they 
also help preserve the environment by repairing and setting up used computers and – con-
sequently – reducing waste.
Communities (local, national, international)
Government
CustomersSuppliers BUSINESS
Employees
Owners Managers