--- book p.15 / pdf 13 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 15
In the real world, other factors than price also affect demand and supply.
Demand is also affected by: 
 ∎ Changes in income: If income increases, people can afford more (and more expen-
sive) computer services and – all other things held constant – demand would increase 
(so the demand curve would shift to the right). Similarly, if income decreased, people 
would not be able to spend so much money on technical support anymore, and conse-
quently, demand would decrease (and the demand curve would shift to the left).
 ∎ Changes in consumer preferences: More and more people might want to have ad-
ditional technical support, so demand would increase. In a different scenario, people 
could possibly like to have new and faster computers, so demand for used computers 
would decrease (regardless of the price).
 ∎ Complementary goods: If an additional service is offered that is related to the com-
puter support service and that people are highly interested in, demand for computer 
services would be very likely to increase.
 ∎ The availability of substitute goods:  If people found a service that perfectly sub-
stitutes computer support services, the demand for computer support service offers 
would also decrease. This effect will also be discussed in chapter 5, Marketing.
Supply is also affected by:
 ∎ Number of suppliers: The more profitable a market is considered to be, the more sup-
pliers will enter this market. As the number of suppliers increases, supply will increase 
(the supply curve would shift to the right), until supply is so high that prices fall again 
and no more additional suppliers enter the market.
 ∎ Technological changes: These might enable more people to provide computer ser-
vices and enter the market.
 ∎ Changes in resource prices: If the costs for offering the service decreased but prices 
for the services stayed the same, more providers would be willinwg to enter the market. 
 ∎ Price expectations: If providers think that prices in the computer market could fall, 
they will probably think of some other field of business to work in and reduce their sup-
ply in their original field of business.
Figure 4. Supply and 
demand intersect at the 
market price (price in euros, 
quantity in 1,000 hours) 
250
200
150
100
50
0
Quantity
Supply and demand
Price
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0