--- book p.23 / pdf 21 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 23
4 Forms of business ownership and 
sources of finance
As soon as businesses are set up and exchange goods and services with customers, the 
customers might wonder who – from a legal point of view – they are actually dealing with: 
the business itself or the people who founded and/or who run it. The answer to this ques-
tion is of particular interest in the case of closing a contract, investing in the business or 
legal troubles: who owns the business? Who runs it? Who is the contracting party and who 
is to be sued in a litigation? Is the business a legal entity of its own or is the business com-
pletely identical with the owner(s) of the business? The answer depends on the legal struc-
ture that has been chosen for the business, something that has implications for a number 
of important questions:
 ∎ Who owns the business? Is this a single person or more than one? Please note that a 
business can also be owned by another business.
 ∎ Does the owner / do the owners also run the business? Or is (are) there (a) different 
person(s) who manage(s) the business?
 ∎ Who is liable for the debts and obligations of the business? And is this liability limited 
or unlimited?
 ∎ How can financial resources be raised for the business?
These questions are not only important for those who do business with a company. They 
are also of utmost importance for the founders and owners of a company. Some owners 
might be interested in running the business themselves and fulfil important management 
tasks such as developing objectives for the business, identifying measures to achieve 
them, planning and organising business activities as well as monitoring and steering the 
business. Others just wish to invest their money and own (a part of) the business but want 
other people to run the business and make the management decisions.
Finance is important because businesses need money for their activities. In the beginning, 
money is needed to get started, to meet all initial expenditures like buying assets (equip-
ment, machinery, vehicles and inventory for example) and covering the expenses like pay-
ing the rent, energy and insurance. Most of these costs occur repeatedly. Depending on 
their legal structure, some businesses have to meet capital requirements. Later, business-
es need money to keep going and – possibly – to expand and grow. Money flowing in from 
sales can be used for that purpose but will possibly not be sufficient and will not always be 
available right at the moment and in the amount that is needed for financing all expendi-
tures. Businesses usually need some additional sources of finance. The legal structure of 
a business has an impact on its financial options. Therefore, businesses often change 
their legal structure in order to gain access to further financial options.
Although the different forms of legal structure as well as their denomination vary among 
countries, the basic forms of legal structure are quite similar in many countries of the world. 

--- book p.24 / pdf 22 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS24
Forms of business ownership and sources of finance
4.1 Sole proprietorship / sole traders
A sole proprietorship is a business that is owned by one person who also manages and runs 
the business. It is easy to establish – especially for small businesses – because there are no 
financial requirements to start this kind of business. The business is not a legal entity of its 
own, so the profits are directly reported on the business owner’s personal income tax state-
ment. This means that the owner pays tax on the profits that are earned from the business. 
The management of the business largely depends on the sole proprietor. On the one hand, 
he/she can make all management decisions and does not necessarily have to consider 
other opinions. On the other, continuity problems may occur if the sole proprietor wants to 
retire or suffers a (long-term) illness. If the sole proprietor needs support, he/she can hire 
personnel. However, it will always be his/her task to make the most important manage-
ment decisions and take all the risk. 
Available financial funds for sole proprietors
Financial funds of the business mainly depend on the financial capabilities of the sole pro-
prietor. If he/she lacks financial funds, it will be very difficult to set up the business. Most 
sole proprietors invest their own savings in their business. If they need some extra money, 
they can try to get it from investors and/or from banks. The owner’s investment and finan-
cial funds from other investors and creditors are external sources of finance.
Banks and other financial institutions offer different kinds of credit, short-term (duration 
less than a year) as well as long-term. The creditor, e.g. the bank, provides money for a 
certain time period which needs to be repaid according to the agreement, usually with a 
rate of return (the interest). Creditors usually ask for assets that can serve as collateral, 
especially for long-term credit. Especially long-term bank loans are often based on land 
and property as collateral (mortgage). 
The most common forms of short-term credit are a bank overdraft and trade credit. A 
bank overdraft is a very flexible instrument, because once the bank account has been 
opened, the sole proprietor can withdraw money from the account when it is needed. Inter-
est is only paid when the account is overdrawn. Trade credit is based on an agreement with 
the supplier. Usually a business does not have to pay all purchases immediately but is 
provided a trade credit period. All kinds of credit – short-term as well as long-term – are 
liabilities for the sole proprietor. 
The sole proprietor is liable for all debts and obligations so his/her private assets are also 
at stake if the business fails and debts need to be repaid and/or the private assets served 
as collateral.
As soon as the business starts operating and generates revenues, internal sources of fi-
nance can possibly be used. If revenues exceed expenses, the business makes a profit 
that can be retained and reinvested in the business (unless the profit is taken by the sole 
proprietor). Another option is the sale of assets that are not needed anymore. Internal 
sources of finance are very important to a business because no financial charges (e.g. inter-
est) have to be paid for this sort of funds.
A sole proprietorship is not the appropriate legal structure for Tina and Steve. They want to 
share the tasks and the risk and have equal rights and responsibilities. Their idea of their 
own business is best realised as a partnership.

--- book p.25 / pdf 23 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 25
4.2 Partnership
If two or more persons jointly found a business, this business is called a partnership. They 
need to set up a partnership agreement in order to settle the rights and responsibilities as 
well as the division of profits and losses. In a general partnership all partners have equal 
rights, liabilities and responsibilities. They can share the tasks and specialise. In difficult 
situations they can exchange their ideas and (maybe) make better decisions. In Austria, 
this form of business ownership is called “Offene Gesellschaft”, or “OG” in short. Tina and 
Steve’s business is located in Austria and they choose to found such an “Offene Gesell-
schaft”, because they intend to be equally involved in the management of the business and 
share the financial risk. Its firm name is T&S Computer Services OG . They will (have to) 
set up a partnership agreement in which they specify each partner’s percentage of owner-
ship, the division of profit and loss, terms of the partnership, rights and responsibilities, 
decision making and resolving disputes, and other details of the partnership.
Available financial funds for partnerships
In general, the financial aspects of partnerships are similar to those of sole proprietors. 
However, two (or more) partners should possibly be able to invest more savings and raise 
more financial funds than a sole proprietor. It also seems plausible that they can offer more 
(private) assets as collateral for getting a loan. Each of the partners is solely liable for all 
debts of the business (unlimited liability).
In a limited partnership there is at least one partner who is not involved in the management 
of the business and this person’s liability is limited to the amount of money that he or she 
has contributed to the business. This form of business ownership is called “Kommanditge-
sellschaft”, or “KG” in short, in Austria.
4.3 Corporations
Corporations are businesses that are legal entities of their own , which means that they 
have the same rights and obligations as people: legal persons can – just like natural per-
sons – own land and property, hire people, close contracts, sue and be sued. The people 
who found the corporation and own a share of the business need not be involved in the 
management of the business, and the managers need not own a share of the business. 
Corporations are more difficult to set up, but the shareholders’ liability is usually limited to 
the amount of money they invested when buying the shares.
4.3.1 Shareholders are not (necessarily) managers of the business
So if shareholders only provide the money for share capital but are neither obliged nor en-
titled to manage the company, who does? The corporation is managed by the board of 
directors, persons who are elected by the shareholders to make all major business deci-
sions and to represent the shareholders. 
The highest-ranking manager of this board is called the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Other 
board members are the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief 
Information Officer (CIO) or Chief Marketing Officer (CMO). The board of directors of AT&S 
consists of three persons with different tasks and responsibilities (see below).

--- book p.26 / pdf 24 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS26
Forms of business ownership and sources of finance
a) Andreas Gerstenmayer is Chairman of the Management Board (CEO) 
and responsible for
 ∎ Sales/marketing
 ∎ Investor Relations/Public Relations/
Internal Communication
 ∎ Purchasing
 ∎ Business Development  Strategy
 ∎ Compliance
b) Monika Stoisser-Göhring is Deputy Chairwoman of the Management Board 
and as SFO responsible for
 ∎ Finance and Accounting
 ∎ Controlling
 ∎ Human Resources incl. CSR
 ∎ Legal & Internal Audit
 ∎ IT & Tools
c) Heinz Moitzi is COO and responsible for:
 ∎ Research & Development (R&D)
 ∎ Maintenance
 ∎ Production
 ∎ Quality Assurance
 ∎ Supply and Disposal
 ∎ Quality Management
 ∎ Business Process Excellence
 ∎ Environment & Sustainability
 ∎ Safety
Source: AT&S annual report 2017/18. The board of directors of AT&S, p. 11.
4.3.2 Available financial funds for corporations
Corporations usually have more options to raise financial funds than sole proprietors and 
partnerships. Their financial funds mainly comprise share capital as well as loans and 
credit. 
Share capital
The capital of a corporation is divided into shares, which is why it is called share capital. If 
share capital equals 1,000,000 euros and is divided by 100,000 shares, each share (also 
called stock) represents 10 euros or 0.001 per cent of the share capital. Persons who buy 
shares become shareholders. Shares can be bought either at the time they are initially is-
sued by the corporation or later on from some other shareholder who sells his shares. If all 
100,000 shares are actually sold, the corporation gains 1,000,000 euros as share capital. 
This example shows that huge amounts of money can be raised from the sale of shares. 
The share capital of AT&S for example equals 141,846,000 euros. Share capital is usually 
not redeemed by the company. It is long-term capital or even permanent capital.
A corporation’s stock can but does not have to be listed on a stock market or stock ex-
change. A stock exchange is a financial market, regulated by the authorities, where shares 
and other securities (e.g. bonds) can be easily bought and sold by lots of people and busi-
nesses. The corporations that want their shares to be listed have to comply with certain 
rules and fulfil listing requirements. The shares are introduced on the stock exchange at a 
certain price (this introduction is also called initial public offering (IPO)) and then the prices 
are determined by demand and supply. According to the laws of supply and demand, usu-
ally the prices go up if demand for shares is high and vice versa. There are a lot of reasons 
why demand for shares of a corporation can change: rising demand can be due to people’s 
expectations that the business is doing well, that it will make profits in the (near) future, 

--- book p.27 / pdf 25 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 27
that it will increase market share and/or successfully introduce a new product. Demand for 
shares is also influenced by economic indicators like economic growth, interest rates and 
inflation. Usually there is higher demand for shares when the economy is thriving (because 
many people have money to invest), with comparatively higher rates of inflation (because 
share prices would also increase) and comparatively low interest rates (because high inter-
est rates would make other investments more attractive). Please note that an increase in 
share prices after they have been issued does not have any additional financing effect for 
the issuing corporation. The beneficiaries of this increase are the shareholders only.
Among the biggest and most well-known stock markets of the world are the New York 
Stock Exchange (NYSE), Nasdaq Inc. in New York, London Stock Exchange (LSE), Tokyo 
Stock Exchange, Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, and Shanghai Stock Exchange. Apart 
from the LSE, the most important stock exchanges in Europe are the Deutsche Börse  in 
Frankfurt, the NYSE Euronext (Europe), the SIX Swiss Exchange (Geneva, Basel and Zurich), 
Borsa Italiana in Milan, and the Spanish Exchange.
There are many reasons why people invest in shares. The most important reasons are: 
 ∎ The intent to provide money for a business they believe in and want to support finan-
cially.
 ∎ Annual income: The wish to get dividends in return; dividends are (part of the) profits 
of the corporation that are paid to the shareholders. There is no obligation for a cor-
poration to do so, but if no dividends are paid over a longer period of time, the shares 
might become unattractive for investors and decreasing demand might lead to falling 
share prices.
 ∎ Capital growth: The hope that share prices will rise and the shares can be sold at a 
higher price than they were bought at.
 ∎ The wish to go to the annual stockholders’ meeting and have the chance to vote and 
influence some business decisions (because common stock includes the right to vote 
at the stockholders’ meeting). Shareholders of preferred shares of stock do not have 
this right but earn a higher dividend.
 ∎ That an investment in shares represents an investment in real values  that will not 
lose its value so easily even in times of high inflation.
In some English-speaking countries, the public limited company (PLC) is one type of such 
a corporation. The term PLC is more commonly used in the United Kingdom and some Com-
monwealth countries. In the USA and other countries, you would rather find the denomina-
tion “Inc.”, which stands for “Incorporated”, or “Ltd” for “Limited”. In German-speaking 
countries this form of legal structure for a business is called “Aktiengesellschaft” (abbrevi-
ated AG) as “Aktien” means “shares” and “Gesellschaft” stands for “corporation”. The min-
imum capital requirement for founding an AG is 70,000 euros, which is the main reason why 
Tina and Steve do not consider an AG the appropriate legal structure for their business.
Another type of corporation is the European Company (SE, société européenne). It is sim-
ilar to an “Aktiengesellschaft” or PLC governed by Community law directly applicable in all 
– and only in – member states of the European Union.
AT&S is an “Aktiengesellschaft” according to Austrian law, and the shares were initially 
listed on the Neuer Markt of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in July 1999. In spring 2008, 
AT&S decided to switch to the home stock exchange in Vienna. AT&S has been quoted in 