--- book p.55 / pdf 53 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 55
6.2.1 Profit and loss account
The profit and loss account is needed to determine whether a business has made a profit 
or a loss over a certain period of time. While the balance sheet contains the assets, liabili-
ties and equity as of a certain day, all the revenues, costs and expenses that occur during 
a time period (e.g. a year) are summarised in the profit and loss account, which is also 
called income statement. 
Revenues are the income (usually cash or accounts receivable) that is generated from sell-
ing goods or services to customers. Costs consist of resources that are consumed in order 
to produce the goods or provide the services.
If the revenues exceed the costs and expenses, the company has a profit. If the company’s 
costs and expenses are higher than the revenue, it suffers a loss. Let’s assume that the 
2018 income statement of T&S Computer Services OG contains 
 ∎ sales revenue of €400,000 and 
 ∎ costs and expenses (like material, wages, rent, energy, depreciation*) and other ex-
penses) of €310,000, then the difference would be a profit of €90,000.
*) Depreciation
Fixed assets are used again and again over a longer period of time. Tina’s car for example 
will be used for at least five more years. Steve’s new computer will be used for three years. 
During that time, the value of these assets decreases ; it is “used up”. Recognising this 
effect is called depreciation. Without depreciation, the values of assets that are shown in 
the accounts would be inaccurate. The value of the assets in the balance sheet would be 
overstated and the financial information given would be flawed.
Steve paid 2,100 euros for his computer and will use it for around three years (so three 
years is the “expected useful life” of the computer). Therefore, depreciation equals 700 
euros per year (using the straight line method to calculate depreciation). After the first year, 
the book value of this computer will be 1,400 euros (2,100 − 700) in the balance sheet, 700 
euros after the second year and 0 euros after the third year.
AT&S describes its depreciation method in the annual report: “From the time of their avail-
ability for use, the assets are depreciated on a straight line basis over their expected useful 
lives. (…) Land is not subject to depreciation. Scheduled depreciation is based on the fol-
lowing useful lives: plants and buildings 10-50 years, machinery and technical equipment 
4-15 years, tools, fixtures, furniture and office equipment 3-15 years.”
As depreciation represents an asset’s loss in value, it is recognised as an expense included 
in the income statement that reduces the (gross) profit, just like other expenses (wages for 
administration, staff, rent, energy, insurance) do. The main difference to other expenses like 
energy, heating or wages is the fact that depreciation does not cause an actual payment.
Profits and losses cannot only be seen in the income statement
At the end of 2018, Tina and Steve draw up another balance sheet to see how their assets 
and capital structure have changed over the first year of business. Due to depreciation, the 
loss of value of their fixed assets, their initial office equipment and the car have a lower 
value than one year before. As they have bought some more office equipment over the year, 
the position has risen to 42,000 euros. Their inventory has increased, but they try to keep 

--- book p.56 / pdf 54 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS56
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
their inventory low because computers need a lot of space and lose their value very quick-
ly. Some customers still owe them money (accounts receivables), just like they have not 
paid all their dues yet (trade credit or accounts payables). They were able to repay part of 
their bank loan. 
Assets (euros) Liabilities and equity (euros)
Office equipment including 
computers 42,000 Owner’s equity 114,000
Van 40,000
Car 6,000
Computers in stock to be sold 
again 18,000 Bank loan 12,500
Receivables 12,500 Trade credit / payables 15,000
Cash and bank deposit 23,000
141,500 141,500
Equity has increased significantly, due to the profit that they made. To learn more about the 
performance of a business (profit or loss), you can either look at the income statement or 
at the development of (owner’s) equity. It is important to note that any profit increases and 
any loss decreases equity.
6.2.2 Cash flow statement
A cash flow statement is another component of the financial statement of a business. It 
reveals the flows of cash into and out of the business during the year. This is important 
information because cash is needed for the operating activities of the business and for in-
vesting. But please note that a positive cash flow is not identical with a profit.
At the beginning of 2018, Tina and Steve had 3,500 euros held in cash positions (including 
cash in bank deposits) and at the end of 2014, they had 23,000 euros in cash. This develop-
ment results in a total cash flow of 19,500 euros (23,000 – 3,500). This means that at the 
end of the year, there is more cash available, so cash must have flowed into the business. 
To learn more about a cash flow’s origin, a cash flow statement is prepared that differenti-
ates between changes in cash positions in
 ∎ operations (these are the core activities of a business, e.g. manufacturing PCBs),
 ∎ investments and
 ∎ financing activities.
Cash flow from operations shows how well a business generates cash with its core 
business. Therefore, it is the most important part of the cash flow statement. This figure 
should be positive, showing that the business is doing well. If a customer pays a receivable 
for example, the payment represents cash from operations. Buying raw material or reduc-
ing trade credit are activities recorded as cash flow from operations.
Cash flow from investments shows how cash is spent for long-term investments (e.g. the 
purchase of a plant or office equipment) or generated by the sale of such assets. A negative 

--- book p.57 / pdf 55 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 57
figure does not necessarily indicate a problem. It rather indicates that the business has 
invested in some assets. Inflows of cash from investments could only come from the sale 
of assets or some investments held.
Financing activities refer to cash that is flowing in from investors or creditors and flowing 
out for paying interest, dividends or repaying debt. At the bottom of the cash flow state-
ment the net change in cash and equivalents can be found. If this figure is positive, then 
the business has had a positive cash flow that can be used for further activities like making 
investments, expanding the business or for repaying debt.
The cash flow statement of AT&S shows an (overall) positive picture; cash flow has in-
creased over the past year. Cash flow from operating activities has been positive and a bit 
higher in 2017/18 than in 2016/17. Due to investments, cash flow from investing activities 
was negative in both years but – at least partly – counterbalanced by cash flow from fi-
nancing activities and from operating activities. All in all, cash flow is 67.2 million euros 
(270.7 – 203.5) for 2017/18.
Table 5. Example of a cash flow statement (source: AT&S annual report 2017/18)
Please note: not all components of this cash flow statement have been explained in the text.
6.3 What can be learnt from reading a balance sheet and an 
income statement
Balance sheets and income statements should always be read with some caution. A lot 
depends on the valuation of assets and businesses are not completely free to determine 
the values of their assets. Depreciation also decreases the value of assets in the balance 
sheet that might actually have a higher value.
Nevertheless, a lot can be learnt by taking a closer look at the balance sheet and the in-
come statement of a business. It is of particular interest to see how some positions have 
developed over time as well as in comparison to other competitors in the market. This al-
lows us to answer questions like:
Question 1: Which assets does the business have – is there a higher percentage of current 
or non-current assets and is this typical of that type of business?
Question 2: How has equity developed and how have the assets been financed? Is there a 
higher percentage of long-term or short-term liabilities? 
Question 3: Is there a balance between non-current assets and long-term financial re-
sources? 