--- book p.28 / pdf 26 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS28
Forms of business ownership and sources of finance
the Vienna Stock Exchange’s Prime Market segment since 20 May 2008. At the same time, 
application for delisting from the Frankfurt Stock Exchange and withdrawal of the admission 
for AT&S shares to be traded on the regulated market (Prime Standard) of the Frankfurt Stock 
Exchange was filed. The delisting became effective as of Sunday, 14 September 2008. There-
fore, the last day on which AT&S shares could be traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange was 
Friday, 12 September 2008. Since Monday, 15 September 2008, AT&S shares have been list-
ed exclusively on the Vienna Stock Exchange (source: https://ats.net/investors/ats-share/
basic-information/).
According to the annual report that AT&S has to publish in order to provide information 
about its business activities and financial performance, about one third of the shares are 
held by two foundations. The rest is free float, which means that these two thirds of shares 
are actually available on the stock exchange. A number of institutional investors have in-
vested in shares of AT&S, but around one third of the stocks are held by private investors 
and other shareholders.
Figure 8. Shareholder structure of AT&S (source: annual report 2017/18)
There are some key figures on shares that are of interest for investors:
Share price and its development is one of them, and as can be seen from table 2, the price 
has risen over the past years, peaking at a price of almost 28 euros in the financial year 
2017/18 and falling to 22 euros at the end of that financial year. 
Market capitalisation or “market cap” is another metric that is often used – especially by 
institutional investors – to evaluate a corporation’s size. In order to diversify their risks, 
investors usually buy shares from a number of companies that differ in various criteria, one 
of which is company size. Market cap is the total market value of a company’s (outstanding) 
shares (= shares currently held by all the shareholders multiplied by the current market 
price). Market cap is not necessarily a meaningful metric for the value of a company be-
cause there are many reasons (that are not related to the value of the company) why share 
price might be particularly high or low. 
Dividend yield expresses the dividend in relation to the share price. 
Price–earnings ratio (P/E ratio) per share refers to a company’s current share price rela-
tive to its earnings per share. A P/E ratio of 15.94 means that an investor can expect to in-