--- book p.8 / pdf 6 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS8
Basic economic concepts
What exactly do their potential customers want and need, 
and how can these needs be addressed? Will there be (con-
tinuous) demand for what they want to offer?
How many people could potentially be interested in their of-
fer (market potential), and are there any competitors in the 
market?
How much would people be willing to pay for their products 
and services and in which way would this price be affected if 
the market changed?
How can a business communicate its offer to its potential 
customers?
Chapter 5
Marketing
How will Tina and Steve know that their business is thriving?
How will they know if their financial situation is solid?
How will they know if their business not only generates profit 
but also turns profits into cash?
Chapter 6
Accounting – 
keeping record 
of business 
transactions
Why are skilled and talented people so important for a 
business? 
What are the tasks of personnel management and how can 
employees be motivated?
Chapter 7
Personnel manage-
ment – because 
people matter
What is a business plan and why is it written? 
What is the structure and the content of a business plan?
Chapter 8
Writing a business 
plan
Summary and application of the learning content Chapter 9
Case study
As Tina and Steve are thrilled about their business idea, they cannot wait to find answers 
to all these questions. 

--- book p.9 / pdf 7 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 9
2 Basic economic concepts
Before going into details about what a business is and how it is run, it is necessary to un-
derstand the business environment, and the economy that it becomes a part of. It is also 
important to understand some basic economic concepts that have an influence on the eco-
nomic decisions not only of businesses but also of individuals, such as what to offer (to sell) 
and what to purchase, how to manage the available resources and how to finance the ex-
penditures.
2.1 Being part of the economy
By running a business, Tina and Steve are an active part of the economy as entrepreneurs. 
Businesses provide goods like computers and services like installing software for people 
who need these goods and services to satisfy their needs. Their needs might include having 
a computer as well as getting technical support. Not only individuals, but also businesses 
have needs: manufacturers of smartphones, tablets and laptops might need the printed 
circuit boards (PCBs) that are produced by AT&S. In turn, AT&S needs raw materials and a 
workforce to produce these PCBs. And individuals might also exchange goods and services 
with each other, like selling a house, an apartment or a used car, or exchanging vegetables 
or flowers from the garden and getting a bottle of wine in return. In the economy, people 
and businesses exchange goods and services to fulfil their needs and wants.
Therefore, Tina and Steve were part of the economy a long time before starting their busi-
ness. As individuals, they have been part of private households and have bought goods and 
services from a wide range of businesses. Like thousands of other households, they need 
food, a home to live in, medical care, a car and/or other kinds of transportation, they want 
to do sports or go to the cinema, to a café or a restaurant. Businesses offer the goods and 
services that people (as part of private households or other businesses) need and/or want. 
 ∎ Exchanging would be much easier if all that we want or need is available in 
abundance, but that is not the case. 
 ∎ Resources are scarce and need to be managed. 
 ∎ This is why we all need to economise. No one is able to opt out of making 
economic decisions.
2.2 Scarcity of resources and opportunity cost
Both households and businesses only have limited resources to pursue their goals: busi-
nesses have a certain number of machines and tools and a limited amount of material and 
financial resources to produce their goods and provide their services. Likewise, households 
only have a certain income that they are able to spend on purchasing goods and services, 
with maybe a part of that income left for saving. R esources are always scarce, and this 
scarcity of resources forces businesses as well as individuals to make decisions on how to 
use those limited resources: what and how to produce, what to buy, how much to spend. 
It is a basic economic problem of households, businesses and the government to decide 
how to use their limited resources and to make choices when allocating these scarce re-
sources between different options. Tina and Steve can either found their own business or 
they can take jobs at another business and become employed. If they earned 35,000 euros 