--- book p.50 / pdf 48 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS50
Marketing
5.7.3 Place
The third P , “Place” or distribution, is sometimes underestimated. But a product can also 
fail in the market because it is not available where customers need it or are looking for it. 
Therefore, place is just as important as the other Ps in the marketing mix. Depending on the 
product, businesses use one or more different distribution channels like 
 ∎ using distributors, wholesalers (who buy and resell to businesses) and/or retailers 
(who buy and resell to consumers),
 ∎ agents or brokers (especially in B2B markets),
 ∎ online selling on the Internet, 
 ∎ telemarketing,
 ∎ vending machines, kiosks etc.
Distribution partners support the manufacturer in bridging the gap from the factory to the 
(final) consumer. They not only take care of logistics tasks but also inform consumers about 
the products and support advertising activities. Just think of a business that produces en-
ergy drinks (or any other beverages). This business would not be able to sell all its output 
directly to consumers, but needs distribution partners to sell the product all over the coun-
try or even in multiple countries (all over the world).
5.7.4 Promotion
The fourth P , “Promotion”, refers to all activities of a business that aim to inform (potential) 
customers as well as the general public about the business, its product(s) and the benefits 
of the product(s). These activities comprise 
 ∎ advertising on TV and on the radio, on the Internet, on social media and in newspa-
pers and magazines, on billboards, on buses and trains, 
 ∎ direct mailing,
 ∎ personal selling (employing salespeople to communicate with customers and serv-
ing them well), 
 ∎ sales promotions,
 ∎ sponsorship of events, of people and/or organisations and 
 ∎ all kinds of public relations activities. These aim to create a favourable image of the 
business among the public and develop a positive relationship to all stakeholders of 
the business.

--- book p.51 / pdf 49 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 51
5.7.5 Mixing the four Ps for a harmonised blend
Tina and Steve have also thought about their marketing mix. These are their considerations:
Product Steve and Tina are convinced that their products will meet demand 
on the market. Over the past years they have helped many friends 
and family members and they know that there are many more people 
who need support when buying, installing and maintaining a com-
puter or a network. On the one hand they would try to buy used com-
puters that are in good condition at a relatively low price and then 
sell them in an even better condition to people who do not necessar-
ily want to have a brand new computer but who are happy to have a 
ready-to-use computer and always have support available. On the 
other hand they would also develop software that is tailored to the 
needs of their customers and support them when using it.
Price It is clear that used computers must be less expensive than new 
ones. So the price for a used laptop computer must be considerably 
lower than the price for a similar new laptop computer at any other 
computer store. So Tina and Steve need to watch that market very 
closely and try to find low-priced computers in order to beat the com-
petition and cover their costs.
Place They cannot run a computer store where customers can choose from 
dozens of different models of computer. They are also not interested 
in having lots of computers in stock. Computer technology becomes 
obsolete very quickly and they also do not have a lot of space, so 
they decide to keep their stock relatively low and to resell as quickly 
as possible. This can be achieved by delivering the computers to their 
customers’ homes. Additionally, they would offer current deals on 
their website.
Please note: in this context, “stock” is a synonym for “inventory”. As 
you have seen in chapter 4, stock can also be used as a synonym of 
“share”.
Promotion People need to be aware of the product(s) and learn more about what 
is offered. Tina and Steve do not have a huge budget, but they can 
afford to set up a website, to put ads into local newspapers, they can 
be found on social networks and they use leaflets and hope for word-
of-mouth advertising through customers who were satisfied with 
their service to work well for them. 