--- book p.23 / pdf 21 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 23
4 Forms of business ownership and 
sources of finance
As soon as businesses are set up and exchange goods and services with customers, the 
customers might wonder who – from a legal point of view – they are actually dealing with: 
the business itself or the people who founded and/or who run it. The answer to this ques-
tion is of particular interest in the case of closing a contract, investing in the business or 
legal troubles: who owns the business? Who runs it? Who is the contracting party and who 
is to be sued in a litigation? Is the business a legal entity of its own or is the business com-
pletely identical with the owner(s) of the business? The answer depends on the legal struc-
ture that has been chosen for the business, something that has implications for a number 
of important questions:
 ∎ Who owns the business? Is this a single person or more than one? Please note that a 
business can also be owned by another business.
 ∎ Does the owner / do the owners also run the business? Or is (are) there (a) different 
person(s) who manage(s) the business?
 ∎ Who is liable for the debts and obligations of the business? And is this liability limited 
or unlimited?
 ∎ How can financial resources be raised for the business?
These questions are not only important for those who do business with a company. They 
are also of utmost importance for the founders and owners of a company. Some owners 
might be interested in running the business themselves and fulfil important management 
tasks such as developing objectives for the business, identifying measures to achieve 
them, planning and organising business activities as well as monitoring and steering the 
business. Others just wish to invest their money and own (a part of) the business but want 
other people to run the business and make the management decisions.
Finance is important because businesses need money for their activities. In the beginning, 
money is needed to get started, to meet all initial expenditures like buying assets (equip-
ment, machinery, vehicles and inventory for example) and covering the expenses like pay-
ing the rent, energy and insurance. Most of these costs occur repeatedly. Depending on 
their legal structure, some businesses have to meet capital requirements. Later, business-
es need money to keep going and – possibly – to expand and grow. Money flowing in from 
sales can be used for that purpose but will possibly not be sufficient and will not always be 
available right at the moment and in the amount that is needed for financing all expendi-
tures. Businesses usually need some additional sources of finance. The legal structure of 
a business has an impact on its financial options. Therefore, businesses often change 
their legal structure in order to gain access to further financial options.
Although the different forms of legal structure as well as their denomination vary among 
countries, the basic forms of legal structure are quite similar in many countries of the world. 