--- book p.52 / pdf 50 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS52
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
6 Accounting – keeping record 
of business transactions
During their first year in business, Tina and Steve buy and sell a lot of computers, they sup-
port their customers by solving their computer problems, and they hire two assistants who 
deal with the customers and other stakeholders, take care of the company’s website and 
do all the paperwork and the bookkeeping. This means that a lot of business transactions 
like purchases, sales, borrowing and lending money etc. take place and businesses need 
to keep accurate records of these business transactions. Bookkeepers are responsible 
for recording these transactions that are always verified by a document (e.g. an invoice or 
a receipt). The aim of recording all transactions is to generate information on the financial 
status of the business. Statements that provide this information are called accounts.
6.1 What a balance sheet is
Tina and Steve have started their business, using computers that they already had as well 
as a new one. They have also purchased some equipment and office furniture and use Ti-
na’s car to drive to their customers. Computers, office equipment and cars – these things 
are all assets, “things” that the business owns and that are used for the business. Tina and 
Steve make a list with all the assets of their business and their values in euros (on the left 
side of the list) and compare it with the amount of money that had to be borrowed from the 
bank (on the right side of the list) to pay for some of their purchases:
Assets euros euros
Office equipment including computers 25,000
Car 8,000
Inventory: computers in stock to be sold again 12,500 Bank loan 25,000
Cash and bank deposit 3,500
49,000
Please note that there are two types of computers in the list: computers that are used in 
the office and are not for sale, and other computers that were bought to be resold (inven-
tory). This difference is important because they are different types of assets.
Only part of the assets was financed by using money from the bank loan. This is due to the 
fact that Tina uses her own car exclusively for the company and Steve uses computers that 
he already owned. They also had some money of their own which they used for setting up 
the business. Therefore, the total amount of the bank loan (which is a liability, i.e. money 
that is owed to someone else) is lower than the total amount of the assets. The difference 
between these two positions is the amount that Tina and Steve were able to finance them-
selves; it is called owner’s equity. It is the proportion of the assets that was NOT financed 
by debt. If we add this position to Tina’s and Steve’s list, their list becomes a balance 
sheet:

--- book p.53 / pdf 51 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 53
Assets (euros) Liabilities and equity (euros)
Office equipment including 
computers 25,000 Owner’s equity (capital) 24,000
Car 8,000
Inventory 12,500 Bank loan ( liabilities) 25,000
Cash and bank deposit 3,500
49,000 49,000
A balance sheet comprises a company’s assets and reveals how they were financed. 
The amount of assets equals the amount of liabilities plus owner’s equity:
assets = liabilities + owner’s equity
This must be an equation because 
 ∎ all assets were funded either through equity or liabilities, 
 ∎ all funds are somehow bound or invested in the business (even money held as cash 
or in a bank account was either funded through equity or liabilities and is bound in the 
specific form it is currently held) and
 ∎ any increase in assets must be financed by an increase in either liabilities or equity 
(capital). 
Please note that if Tina and Steve buy computer software and pay cash, the total amount 
of the assets remains the same (one asset – software – increases, but another one – cash 
– decreases by the exact same amount, so it is just an “asset swap”). But if they buy the 
software on credit, then the amount of assets increases and liabilities also increase by the 
exact same amount. Accordingly, the balance sheet total increases.
Assets are usually listed in the balance sheet in a certain order. They comprise fixed assets 
(or non-current assets) that normally have a lifespan of more than one year and are in-
tended to be used in the company for a longer time period than one year. Usually they can-
not be turned into cash so easily. Current assets have higher liquidity. They are usually not 
used longer than a year because they are used up, spent in production or sold.
Examples of fixed assets / non-current assets are property, plant, premises, buildings, 
machinery and all kind of equipment like office equipment, e.g. computers that are used in 
the office. Also financial assets – if meant to be kept longer than a year – can be fixed or 
non-current assets.
Examples of current assets  are inventory (merchandise that has not been sold yet, like 
computers in stock), accounts receivables / debtors (money that is owed to the business, 
also called trade receivables), cash.
There are also intangible assets like trademarks, patents and copyrights. Although they 
cannot be seen or touched they are also of value for the business like tangible assets are. 
Tina and Steve do not have any intangible assets (yet), but the AT&S balance sheet (see 
below) contains intangible assets of almost 76 million euros, mainly acquired patents, 
trademarks and licenses.

--- book p.54 / pdf 52 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS54
Accounting – keeping record of business transactions
Liabilities are debts and obligations that are owed to other persons, businesses or banks 
and need to be repaid at a certain point in time and/or over a certain period of time. These 
funds are usually provided by banks or suppliers. Money owed to suppliers is also called 
trade credit or trade payables. Current liabilities are debts or obligations that are due with-
in one year. Accordingly, non-current liabilities have a duration of more than one year.
Equity / owner’s equity is the difference of assets and liabilities. It is an indicator of the 
wealth of the company. A high equity ratio (= equity / total capital) indicates that the re-
spective portion of assets was financed by the company’s own resources (for example with 
funds provided by the owners or shareholders of the company). It is important for a busi-
ness to have sufficient equity because: 1) equity usually does not have to be repaid, 2) it 
helps a business to be relatively independent from its creditors and 3) if the company has 
a loss and there is a higher amount of equity, the company will not be over-indebted.
Determining the value of assets is an important but also tricky task. While it might not be 
difficult to determine the exact amount of a bank loan, it is more difficult to tell what a build-
ing is worth many years after it was buil t. Businesses usually want to present themselves 
in the best way possible when setting up their balance sheet. However, they need to stick 
to the legal rules and regulations that aim to ensure that information given in balance 
sheets can be trusted.
6.2 Other components of the financial statement of a business
The balance sheet is not the only component of the financial statement of a business. The 
financial statement of the business aims to show the performance of the business over a 
certain period of time, but the balance sheet only shows the assets, liabilities and equity at a 
certain point in time. It does not contain information on total sales (turnover), nor does it 
reveal the cost of producing the goods and services or other expenses. Therefore, the finan-
cial statement consists of the balance sheet, the income statement (profit and loss account) 
and the cash flow statement, which gives an insight into the inflow and outflow of cash.
Figure 24. The main components of a financial statement of a business
Balance sheet
Assets, liabilities 
and equity
Income 
statement
Revenues, costs 
and expenses
Cash flow 
statement
Inflow and 
outflow of cash
Financial statement
reveals the performance of a business over a certain period of time