--- book p.11 / pdf 9 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 11
In the circular flow of the economy (see figure 1), public authorities (mainly governments) 
also play an important role. They levy taxes from households and businesses and use the 
money to provide goods, transfer payments and subsidies. Such goods as infrastructure 
(e.g. streets and street lights) and services like national defence and public security (e.g. 
police) need to be provided by governments and financed by taxation. There is demand for 
these goods, but private businesses would not want to supply them as “free riders” (people 
who do not pay for a good or service) cannot be excluded from enjoying them. In many – but 
not all – countries health care and education are also provided (at least to a large extent) 
by public authorities. 
Figure 1. The circular flow of goods, services and money within the economy
Division of labour and specialisation
Without exchange of goods and services, individuals would have to produce everything 
they need themselves. That would be very difficult, time-consuming and inefficient be-
cause they would have to spend time on performing tasks that they lack the skills for. Ex-
changing goods and services allows for the division of labour and therefore specialisation. 
Individuals and businesses can concentrate on what they can do best. This explains the 
wide variety of jobs and of businesses. Using a widely accepted means of exchange like 
money facilitates the exchanges.
Specialisation can be found on many levels: 
 ∎ Within households, for example where individuals can concentrate on what they can 
do best or what they like doing (like one individual does the shopping, the other one the 
cooking). 
 ∎ The same principle applies to businesses: within businesses, some people concen-
trate on production, others on procurement, some others on sales, on recording all 
Private 
households
Government
(public authorities)
Businesses
Goods, services, transfer payments Goods, services and subsidies
Taxes Taxes
Payments
Labour
Wages
Goods and services

--- book p.12 / pdf 10 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS12
Basic economic concepts
financial transactions or on managing human resources. Accordingly, these (different) 
tasks of a business are often summarised in different departments of a business: pro-
curement, production, sales department, marketing, finance and accounting.
 ∎ Specialisation can also be found between businesses as every business focuses on a 
special range of products: some offer all kinds of furniture, others just beds and couch-
es, some others just produce kitchens. These businesses operate on the same level of 
production. But specialisation can also be based on division of labour between busi-
nesses on different levels of production (first level: production of wood and iron, sec-
ond level: production of boards and nails, third level: production of tables, final level: 
selling them) or in different sectors of the economy (see chapter 3).
 ∎ Specialisation can also be found on an international level,  as countries differ in cli-
mate, natural resources, geographical position and many other characteristics. Due 
to very different characteristics, countries also differ in their conditions for different 
industries (industry being a number of businesses that produce or sell the same prod-
uct) and different business functions. AT&S for example has production sites in Europe 
as well as in Asia (China, India and South Korea). While production in Europe is highly 
diversified and relatively low in volume, production in Asia reaches a much higher vol-
ume but has a lower product diversity. This kind of division of labour can be explained 
by differences in terms of know-how of the workforce, labour costs, availability of other 
resources and the legal framework in different countries.
While division of labour has many advantages, it also has some disadvantages that need 
to be considered: for very specialised workers, work may become boring over time. Being 
specialised also means less flexibility as it is hard to develop other skills or develop com-
petencies in other fields. A specialised business may be brilliant in that field, but if – for 
some reason – that specialisation is not needed anymore, the business is at risk and peo-
ple could lose their jobs.
2.5 Different economic systems
The role of governments described above is mainly true for the governments in some sort 
of market economy. While in market economies individuals and businesses are – more or 
less – allowed to make many of their own economic decisions, in planned economic sys-
tems the governments play a dominant role. They (mainly or partly) decide which goods 
are produced and which services are offered (at which prices). Furthermore, they (mainly or 
partly) control the resources and the means of production. People have a limited choice of 
which job to do and which products to buy.
In most countries of the world, economies can be characterised as some kind of market 
economy. In some of these countries, the governments play a minor role by only providing 
the legal framework and not influencing the economy much, so their economic system 
comes close to what is called a “free market economy”. In many other countries, the gov-
ernment plays a more important role by influencing the economy to a somewhat higher 
extent, by supporting the poor and protecting the environment for example. These systems 
are called “social market economies” or “eco-social market economies”. 
Over the past decades, a lot of former communist countries that used to have planned 
economic systems have adopted the main principles of the market economy. Many Central 
and Eastern European Countries (CEE), China and former Soviet countries are examples of 
such a transformation. 

--- book p.13 / pdf 11 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 13
2.6 Supply and demand: Households, businesses 
and the government meet in the market
In a market economy, goods and services are offered and sold on/at markets. Buyers and 
sellers meet to communicate the conditions of exchanging goods and services and thus 
form a market. A market can be an actual place, like a flower market in the city of Rome or 
a flea market in a small village, but it can also be a virtual place like a market on the Inter-
net (e.g. eBay, Amazon). Buying and selling take place in shops, but also on the phone. 
Therefore, there are many different markets, also depending on what is offered: consumer 
goods markets, labour markets (supply and demand for work), housing markets, money 
markets, capital markets, commodity markets (supply and demand for raw materials).
2.6.1 The law of supply 
Supply (of a certain good or service) is the quantity of that good or service that is 
available for purchase. Basically, this quantity mainly depends on the businesses’ pro-
duction capacities and the available resources, but also on the price that can be charged 
for the good or the service. The higher this price is, the higher the supply will be. All 
other things held constant (“ceteris paribus”), this relationship is true for most goods and 
services in the economy (law of supply). 
In Tina’s and Steve’s case, the quantity of hours that they (as well as other providers of 
similar computer support services) are willing to work depends on the price they can charge 
and that will be paid. It is tiring work and the providers of this service need to be very 
skilled. If the price is low, let’s say below 30 euros per hour for example, no provider would 
offer that service. The opportunity cost would be too high: as the providers are very skilled, 
they could earn more money by doing something else (that is also less tiring), so they would 
leave this market and offer another kind of service. The higher the price, the higher the 
number of hours that would be offered. More potential providers would enter the market 
and would be willing to offer a higher number of hours of their service. 
The shape of the supply curve can also be explained by the concept of increasing marginal 
costs faced by many industries and businesses. Marginal cost is the cost of producing an 
additional unit of a good or by providing an additional unit of a service. As output increases 
and exceeds a certain level it will become more and more costly to produce; businesses 
need to build higher capacities (machinery, personnel) so marginal costs would rise. Only 
250
200
150
100
50
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Quantity
Supply per week
Price
Figure 2. The supply curve 
(price in euros, quantity in 
1,000 hours)