--- book p.7 / pdf 5 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 7
Alternatively, Tina and Steve could easily find jobs that they are interested in because they 
both have a profound knowledge of business and computer science. During their studies 
both of them worked for AT&S, the Austrian company Austria Technologie & Systemtechnik 
AG, for a couple of months and they liked that very much. AT&S (https://ats.net/de/) is a 
manufacturer of high-end printed circuit boards and of new technologies such as IC sub-
strates, mSAP and advanced packaging. It is located in Styria with some production sites 
in Asia and ranks among the globally leading companies in that field. In Europe, AT&S is 
the market leader, with revenue of about €990 million and almost 10,000 employees.
However, at the moment, they both prefer the idea of being self-employed, generating their 
own ideas, creating something new and being their own bosses. They prefer to become 
entrepreneurs who have developed an idea, solve problems and create value for their 
customers, take a risk and make sensible economic decisions.
They consider further aspects about founding their business. They are ready to work long 
hours and invest their savings in the business. They have found a business location that 
they consider appropriate, where they could rent two rooms in an office building for meet-
ing with customers, working and developing software, storing the computers and other 
equipment. Additionally, they would need a car or – even better – a small van that they 
would use for transporting the computers between their customers and their office. Tina’s 
car, which she does not really use very often, could be used for that purpose, at least for 
the first few months. Yet, they know from what they have learned during their business 
studies that there are a few more questions to be considered. The following chapters cover 
the basic knowledge that is needed for answering these questions.
Important questions to be considered before setting up a business
Questions covered in chapter
Which people and organisations have an interest in the busi-
ness and/or are influenced by Tina’s and Steve’s business 
activity? 
How does Tina’s and Steve’s business influence the environ-
ment and the economy?
Chapter 2
Basic economic 
concepts
What kind of business will Tina’s and Steve’s business be? Chapter 3
Focus on different 
kinds of businesses
Tina and Steve work as a team, so which legal form should 
their business have?
Do Tina and Steve have enough funds to finance their busi-
ness? What sources of finance could and should they use?
As they will have bills to pay or might have to repay a loan, 
how can they make sure that they have the funds for that 
and who will be liable for these payments?
Chapter 4 
Forms of business 
ownership and 
sources of finance