--- book p.39 / pdf 37 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 39
5.6 Market segmentation and targeting strategies
Market research may reveal that some characteristics (like age, gender, education level, 
income level, behavioural patterns, interests etc.) may be relevant for describing the (po-
tential) customers of a business. Steve and Tina have thought about such characteristics 
and identified the following ones:
 ∎ Geographic: The Austrian city where their business is based and the surrounding area.
 ∎ Demographic: Adult men and women, all ages, employed and retired as well as self-
employed.
 ∎ Psychographic: People who want to get a laptop, but are not willing to pay the full price 
for a new one; people who care about the environment and are happy to use something 
second-hand; people who want assistance with getting their laptop started etc.
 ∎ Buying behaviour: People who buy a laptop for occasional use (not heavy users) etc.
These characteristics can possibly be used to differentiate between relatively homogeneous 
subgroups of customers (market segmentation). Segmentation makes sense for a business 
if the segments are measurable (size, purchasing power etc.) and profitable, accessible by 
communication and distribution channels, and durable (not changing too quickly). If such 
segments can be found, the business selects the segment(s) that it wants to target with its 
products (targeting). The next step is to position the products so that it becomes clear which 
product meets the demands of the targeted subgroups. Positioning is the process by which 
marketers try to create an image or identity in the minds of their target market(s).
Figure 14. Market segmentation, targeting and positioning
Segmentation
Targeting
Positioning
What are the characteristics of
my (potential) customers? 
Can they be divided in groups?
Which groups of customers
are my target groups?
Which products
will meet the demands
of my customers?
P
P

--- book p.40 / pdf 38 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS40
Marketing
Mass marketing, segment marketing and niche marketing
A business applies mass marketing if it ignores the different segments of a market and 
offers the same product to all customers. The product is promoted to all segments of a 
market in almost the same way. Mass marketing is often applied for products like pens and 
pencils, soaps, personal hygiene products and detergents because they are used by so 
many people regardless of their personal characteristics. Mass marketing allows a busi-
ness to produce a relatively large number of the same product and sell it to a relatively large 
market. On the one hand, this enables the business to gain economies of scale: if a large 
number of identical products is produced, some costs will not increase accordingly (in a 
directly proportional way) but can be divided by a larger number of products. This results 
in reduced costs per unit due to an increased total output of a product. On the other hand, 
mass marketing is also inflexible and makes it more difficult to react to particular changes 
in some target markets.
Segment marketing means offering different products to one or more segments ( some 
segmentation). Businesses focus their (limited) resources on offering products that are 
tailored to the needs and wants of their customers in the segments that they know best 
(strategic fit).
Niche marketing, however, focuses on particular segments of a market. Different products 
are offered to subgroups within segments (more segmentation). Many small businesses 
rather employ niche marketing because they would not be able to produce the quantity of 
products for a mass market. Some businesses just target selected segments of a market 
because they have specialised in a certain field. If they are good at it, they can be market 
leaders regardless of their size.
Tina and Steve have chosen niche marketing. They are a small business and they focus on 
the special needs of customers, not the mass market. They target individual persons, sole 
proprietors and small offices / home offices (that is their segment) with limited funds for 
their computer equipment, no need to have the latest computer model or release of a pro-
gram and a high need of technical support (that is their niche within the segment).
Targeting is the first step towards an effective marketing strategy.  It is based on the 
process of evaluating each segment’s attractiveness and selecting one or more segments 
to enter. Therefore, a target market, a segment, is a group of people or businesses towards 
whom a business markets its goods, services or ideas with a strategy designed to satisfy 
their specific needs and preferences. In order to do so, it takes a good marketing mix as a 
second step to serve the target market. 

--- book p.41 / pdf 39 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 41
5.7 The marketing mix
A marketing mix is a harmonised blend of several marketing tools that best meets the 
needs and wants of the customers of the targeted market. It consists of the four elements 
product, price, place and promotion – the four Ps – that each comprise several tools. It is 
the basic idea of the marketing mix to provide a good at an affordable price at a convenient 
place and communicate a certain message in order to promote the sale of the product. 
Based on market research
Figure 15. The four elements of the marketing mix
5.7.1 Product
The first P , “Product”, refers to all goods and services that are offered by a business. This 
“P” is always at the heart of marketing and the most important decision of a business. Most 
businesses offer not just one product, but a range of products. Products that are very sim-
ilar (like several slightly different laptop computers) represent a product line. A business 
can produce just one product line (just laptop computers) or different product lines (laptop 
computers, monitors, printers, storage media, and so on).
Brands are created to support product differentia-
tion. A brand consists of a name or a (few) word(s) 
and/or a symbol and/or a sign. It distinguishes a 
product or the business from other products and 
businesses and is intended to build a USP and 
brand recognition as well as brand loyalty. Some 
brands are well known all around the world and 
look the same wherever you find them: the same 
colour, the same font etc.
Brands also serve as a guarantee of stable quality and of a certain level of quality that is 
maintained all over the world. Brands can render trust and safety of choice for a customer. 
For many people it is reassuring to find some brands that they are familiar with when they 
are travelling in foreign countries and feeling uncomfortable or homesick.
Which goods and 
services …
Product
Are sold at 
which price?
Price
Where?
Place
Based on which 
message?
Promotion
Marketing Mix

--- book p.42 / pdf 40 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS42
Marketing
The product mix
According to the product-mix strategy of a business it can specialise in one sort of product 
(by offering just one product line) or diversify its production (by offering different product 
lines, increasing product mix width) or even both. 
As consumers’ needs and wants change over time, products need to be altered from time 
to time. Minor changes (like different packaging, colours, etc.) are called a relaunch. If a 
relaunch is not enough to keep customers satisfied, then major changes are necessary or 
the product has to be eliminated from the product line altogether. Businesses can either 
add new products to an existing product line (which is a line extension, like producing more 
flavours of ice cream) or they can add a new product line (which is a mix extension, like 
yogurts in addition to ice cream). Products can also be altered over time (creating a new 
range of ice cream products instead of the existing one) or eliminated from the product 
range of a company if a relaunch does not seem promising.
Figure 16. Product-mix strategies
Tina and Steve also offer more than one product. They effectively have three different 
“products” in their portfolio:
 ∎ Used computers and computer equipment that is in good condition and ready to use.
 ∎ Services relating to the computer, online help, technical support.
 ∎ Development of software that is needed.
While they target both consumers and businesses with the first two “products”, the third 
one is more relevant for businesses that might need some software that is tailored to their 
needs and not yet available.
Other businesses like AT&S mainly target other businesses that need the AT&S products 
for their own production (like Apple for example, which needs AT&S components for pro-
ducing mobile phones). Depending on the application intended by the customer, AT&S has 
developed three different business units with a different range of products:
Expansion
Increasing the 
depth of a line
Increasing the 
number of lines
Mix extensionLine extension
Alteration
Altering existing 
products
Contraction
Eliminating 
products or lines
Product-Mix Strategies

--- book p.43 / pdf 41 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 43
Figure 17. Business units of AT&S (source: annual report 2017/18).
Please note: the term EBITDA will be explained in chapter 6, Accounting
The first business unit produces components that are used for manufacturing mobile 
phones, tablets, laptops and digital cameras. The second one focuses on components that 
are needed for the production of driver assistance systems in cars, for control systems in 
all kinds of machines and for diagnostic medical instruments. The third one specialises in 
the production of memory cards and power modules in phones. Though these products 
may seem similar at first glance – especially to those who have little technical knowledge 
– they differ in their characteristics, e.g. their product cycles, and in the way they satisfy 
different customer needs and wants – they address different segments.
The product life cycle and the Boston Consulting Group matrix
The product life cycle represents a theoretical model of several stages over the life span 
of a product that differ in sales volume and in profit.
Figure 18. The product life cycle
€
0
Sales volume
Profit / Loss
Product life cycle
Price
Time
Introduction Growth Maturity Decline

--- book p.44 / pdf 42 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS44
Marketing
Before a product is introduced to the market, there are no sales, so no money is flowing into 
the business. However, there are costs from product development, so the introduction 
phase starts with a loss. After the product launch, the product begins to sell. But costs 
might still be higher than sales because the business needs to spend a lot on promoting 
the product (advertisements, sales events) and introductory prices might be low to attract 
customers. In this phase, the product can be a so-called “question mark”. According to the 
Boston Consulting Group matrix, a product with low relative market share in a market that 
is rapidly growing is a “question mark” (see figure 19). Towards the end of the introduction 
phase, revenues exceed costs and a (small) profit is made.
During the growth period, sales increase more rapidly than costs (average costs might even 
fall due to increased output and economies of scale). As market share increases in a market 
that is still growing, the product may become a “star”. Stars are very valuable to busi-
nesses because of their strong market position. In order to maintain this position, busi-
nesses need to invest money in promotion and in production facilities. Usually, the busi-
ness finally makes a profit in the growth stage that peaks in the maturity stage. 
As soon as the market is not growing that fast anymore, but market share is still high, the 
product becomes a “cash cow”. Businesses usually do not invest so much money anymore 
because market growth has become low. So revenues are (still) high but expenses decrease.
However, profits will – sooner or later – tend to fall again due to increased competition, which 
often causes lower prices and higher costs (for promoting the product). The product more and 
more becomes a “poor dog” as it nears the decline stage. Sales fall (sometimes even rapidly) 
and so do profits. Market growth is low and market share might also be relatively low.
The product life cycle varies enormously in duration across product categories. The matu-
rity stage can take months or years – some products like detergents, toothpaste or per-
fumes seem to have an indefinite maturity phase. Other products (“fads”) have a very short 
life cycle and have to be withdrawn after less than a year.
High
Market 
growth
Low
STARS QUESTION MARKS
CASH COWS POOR DOGS
High Low
Relative market share
Figure 19. The Boston Consulting Group matrix
????

--- book p.45 / pdf 43 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 45
The product portfolio of a business should be balanced – a blend of stars, cash cows, ques-
tion marks and not too many poor dogs. Revenues from the cash cows can be used to sup-
port the stars (because they are the future cash cows) and invest in question marks that the 
business believes in. Table 4 summarises the product life cycle characteristics and the 
strategies that can be adopted in the different stages of the product life cycle.
Introduction Growth Maturity Decline
Strategy Market 
development
Market 
penetration
Defensive 
positioning
Efficiency 
or exit
Customers Innovators/
early adopters Mass market Mass market Loyal 
costumers
Sales Low level, 
then rising Rapid growth At a peak, 
slow groth Declining
Profit None (loss) Strong, then 
peak Declining Low/none
Table 4. Product life cycle characteristics
In order to prevent sales from declining, a business may decide to use a strategy to extend 
the life cycle of a product (an “extension strategy”). Changing the product mix and entering 
new markets are the most important extension strategies, as can be seen in Ansoff’s prod-
uct–market matrix. 
Ansoff’s product–market matrix as a development tool
The Ansoff Matrix, also known as the product–market matrix or the product/market ex-
pansion grid, is a development tool for businesses. In order to develop and grow in the 
long term, they need to continuously rethink their strategies and be ready to change, even 
in times when the business is going well. They need to consider alternative ways to reach 
new customers by further developing their products and creating new ones.
Existing 
market New market
Existing product Market 
penetration
Market 
development
New product Product 
development Diversification
Figure 20. The Ansoff Matrix

--- book p.46 / pdf 44 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS46
Marketing
Market penetration, in the upper left quadrant in figure 20, is the safest of the four options. 
Adopting this strategy, a business focuses on expanding sales of the existing product(s), 
e.g. ice cream, in the existing market. This can be achieved by improving the product (e.g. 
enhancing the flavour), by promoting it in new ways (e.g. new TV adverts), by using addi-
tional distribution channels or by increasing sales personnel. This is a low-risk strategy, 
because the business knows the product and the market.
Product development, in the lower left quadrant, is slightly riskier, because the business 
needs to introduce a new product into the existing mark et (a new flavour of ice cream or 
other products like cookies and chocolate). This will only make sense if a problem has been 
identified that cannot be solved with the existing product(s).
With market development, in the upper right quadrant, an existing product is put into an 
entirely new market. Businesses identify new target groups that might also find the product 
useful. Maybe a new use for the product can be found or some additional features or ben-
efits can be added.
Diversification, in the lower right quadrant, is the riskiest of the four options. Not only is the 
product new but so is the market – two unknown variables at once. However, diversification 
can also be adopted in order to reduce risk in the long run. With more than just one product 
line that targets more than one segment of the market, a business can make sure that even 
if one product line suffers losses the other one(s) might still be profitable.
5.7.2 Price
The second P , “Price”, is also crucial and difficult to determine. Once a price has been set, 
it is very hard to change the pricing strategy because that would confuse customers. The 
lowest possible price is not always the safest choice to appeal to customers. The main in-
fluencing factors are: 
 ∎ Costs, because costs need to be covered and – possibly – some profit gained. The ap-
proach of setting a price on the basis of cost is called cost-based pricing. 
 ∎ The prices charged by the competition (because if the product is not superior or differ-
ent to similar products of the competitors it will be impossible to explain a higher price). 
 ∎ Demand, because it is also important to consider how much customers are willing to 
pay. If demand is high, a higher price can be set.
Cost-based pricing
In the long run, all businesses need to cover their total cost if they want to survive. Total 
costs comprise fixed costs and variable costs. Variable costs increase directly as output 
rises (the more computers sold and the more technical problems of clients solved the high-
er the variable costs are). Fixed costs are independent of the output, like the rent or insur-
ance for the office. As soon as revenues exceed total cost, the business “breaks even”. The 
output that needs to be sold in order to “break even” is also called the “break-even point”. 
Figure 21 shows this concept with a simplified example. Let’s assume Tina and Steve of-
fered just one product (e.g. a certain type of laptop with certain specifications) that causes 
variable costs of 480 euros and can be sold for 720 euros. Fixed costs amount to 130,000 
euros (independent of the output that is produced). Figure 21 shows fixed costs, variable 
costs, total costs and revenues for different levels of output of that laptop.

--- book p.47 / pdf 45 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 47
Fixed costs are a straight horizontal line. In the short run, they remain the same regardless 
of the output. Of course, fixed costs could increase by a certain amount (“stepped fixed 
cost”) at a certain level of output because more office space, more equipment and/or more 
staff for administration are required. Variable costs increase directly as output rises. Total 
costs equal variable costs plus fixed costs. The point where the revenue line and the total 
cost line intersect is called the break-even point. It indicates the level of output a business 
needs to produce and sell to break even, i.e. to start making profits. 
 ∎ Selling price €720 – variable cost €480 = €240 that contribute to covering fixed costs. 
This is why the difference between selling price and variable cost per item is also called 
contribution.
 ∎ The contribution of €240/item will contribute to the total fixed costs of the business 
(€130,000) and the profit.
 ∎ Fixed costs of €130,000 / €240 contribution per item = 541.67 items that it takes to 
cover the fixed costs.
 ∎ Starting with the 542nd item sold, the business will make a profit. Below that level, the 
business will make a loss.
Figure 21. Break-even point
Of course, the break-even point can be reached more easily by increasing prices and/or by 
reducing variable costs.
Variable cost plus pricing / distribution pricing
In order to calculate prices, a markup is added to the variable cost of producing a good (or 
service). If Tina and Steve choose to add a 50% markup and the variable cost of one laptop 
that they have just repaired and set up is 480 euros, then the selling price for one laptop 
would be 480 + 240 = 720 euros (excl. VAT). 
Let’s assume one customer offered to buy ten such laptops but was only willing to pay 
6,000 euros for the ten laptops (excl. VAT). Should they refuse that offer? They would not 
earn the 50% markup, but they would be able to cover their variable costs (€4,800) and earn 
a contribution towards the fixed costs. Only if they are sure of selling the laptops to some-
1,000,000
900,000
800,000
700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400
Number of items
 Revenues     Fixed costs     Variable costs     Total costs
Break-even point: Revenues = total costs
Euros

--- book p.48 / pdf 46 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS48
Marketing
one else for a higher price should they decline the offer. In fact, the variable costs of pro-
ducing a good represent the absolute lower limit for the price of this good. As soon as the 
price exceeds the variable costs, this “excess” contributes to covering the fixed costs. 
Therefore, this amount is also called “contribution”. 
So if variable costs for one of these laptops were 480 euros and the price was 600 euros 
(excl. VAT), then 120 euros would contribute to covering the fixed costs and making a prof-
it. In competitive markets that require businesses to consider the pricing policies of their 
competitors, businesses usually employ distribution pricing when setting prices for new 
products or for contract bidding: they add a certain markup to variable costs.
Price elasticity of demand
Before changing prices it makes sense to consider how customers might react to an in-
creased or decreased price. A price adjustment will not affect demand uniformly for all 
types of products. How demand is affected depends on the price elasticity of demand. 
Demand is “elastic” if the change in demand (in per cent) exceeds the price adjustment (in 
per cent). Let’s assume that lowering the price for used laptop computers from 500 to 400 
euros (which is a price reduction of 20%) causes an increase in demand from 70 to 100 
pieces (an increase in the quantity demanded of 43%). People who were thinking about 
buying a laptop computer now decide to buy one. And even people who already have a 
desktop computer purchase a laptop computer as a second option. Demand is elastic and 
price adjustments may make sense because the quantity demanded increases by 43% (and 
– depending on the costs – profits might also rise). 
Figure 22 shows an example of the effects of a price reduction on the quantity demanded 
and on revenues:
 ∎ Price reduction of €100/initial price €500 = 20% price reduction.
 ∎ Increase in demand of 30 units/initial demand 70 units = 43% increase in quantity 
demanded.
 ∎ The ratio +43/−20 = −2.15 is the price elasticity of demand as measured from the 
initial point on the demand curve. 
The demand for laptops is elastic (the ratio 2.15 is greater than 1), because the 
change in demand (+43%) exceeds the price adjustment (−20%).
 ∎ Increase in revenues of €5,000/initial revenues €35,000 = 14.3% increase in revenues.
Figure 22. Price elasticity of 
demand: example of elastic 
demand
70 100 150
€ 500
€ 400
€ 300
demand (for used notebook computers)
Price elasticity of demand
Price
revenue
= € 35,000
revenue
= € 40,000
revenue
= € 45,000

--- book p.49 / pdf 47 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 49
For other products, the situation might be different. Let’s assume Steve and Tina have de-
veloped a computer program that optimises data storage and Internet security. If they sold 
a licence for that software for 60 euros they would be able to sell 90 licences per month. A 
€10 price reduction (−17%) would only increase the quantity of sold licences by 11% (and 
revenues would actually decrease), so a price reduction might not make much sense. In-
elastic demand is often found with products that people need anyway and buy more or less 
regardless of the price. Salt, fuel or medicine are classic examples of such products.
Let’s have a closer look at the example in figure 23:
 ∎ Price reduction €10; €60 initial price = 17% price reduction.
 ∎ Increase in quantity demanded of 10; initial quantity demanded 90 = 11% increase 
in demand.
 ∎ In this case, the price elasticity of demand (again, as measured from the initial 
point on the demand curve) amounts to +11 / −17 = −0.65. The demand is inelastic 
(the ratio 0.65 is less than 1) because the change in demand (+11%) is lower than 
the price adjustment (17%).
 ∎ Revenues decrease by 400 euros.
Figure 23. Price elasticity of 
demand: example of inelastic 
demand
Elasticity of demand does not only depend on prices and price change. Demand is more in-
elastic if a product cannot be easily substituted by other products. It is also important to note 
that elasticity in the short run (up to one year) might differ from elasticity in the long run. In 
the long run, demand for some products may be elastic (even if it is not in the short run) be-
cause it takes people some time to change their habits and find substitutes for products that 
have become more expensive (e.g. taking the train instead of driving by car in times of high 
fuel prices). At the same time, the opposite may be true for other products that are durable 
and can be stocked so people would quickly buy them when prices have dropped.
90 100 120
€ 60
€ 50
€ 40
demand (for software licences)
Price elasticity of demand
Price
revenue
= € 5,400
revenue
= € 5,000
revenue
= € 4,800