--- book p.33 / pdf 31 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 33
solve customers’ problems and fulfil their wishes and needs. Benefits for the customer may 
be the functionalities of the product but also some additional features, the image that it 
conveys and the joy it gives to its user.
A mobile phone creates value for example, because you can reach your family and friends 
from wherever you are (so it creates value through functionalities), and you can also receive 
emails, messages and surf online (additional features). If you buy the latest model of a 
certain mobile phone with lots of additional functionalities, everyone thinks you are an ex-
pert in the field and that makes you happy.
5.1 What a product is
In marketing terminology, a product is every good and/or service that can be exchanged 
in order to fulfil the wishes and needs of customers. Customers can be either other 
businesses or consumers (private households). Producer products are goods and services 
that are sold from one business to another (business-to-business, B2B), while consumer 
products are sold to consumers or private households (business-to-consumer, B2C). If 
Steve and Tina buy a printer for their office, it is a producer product. If the exact same 
printer is not used in their office but in their private homes, it is a consumer product. Tina 
and Steve offer computer support services, mainly to private households (B2C), but also to 
other businesses (B2B).
5.2 Objectives of marketing
In order to fulfil customers’ wishes and needs, a business has to analyse the market(s) it 
wants to operate in and be clear about its marketing objectives. They may include but are 
not limited to: 
 ∎ Customer satisfaction: If customers are not satisfied with the product, they will not 
buy it (again). Satisfied customers often become loyal customers who will possibly buy 
the product again. This is why this objective is interrelated with the other ones.
 ∎ Creating a unique selling proposition (USP): If a product has a USP , it is or is consid-
ered to be – in one way or another – different from other similar products. This is also 
called product differentiation and can be based on a certain characteristic of the prod-
uct or to the way it is promoted and perceived by customers. Building a brand supports 
creating a USP . The product is or seems to be “special” or “unique” or “better than the 
rest”. A business is interested in creating a USP for its product(s) because this helps to 
attract many loyal customers.
 ∎ Gaining and maintaining market share: Businesses will be interested in having a cer-
tain share of the market – it indicates their relative importance in the market compared 
to their competitors’ positions. It is therefore an indicator of competitiveness. 
 ∎ Maintaining or increasing sales: Sales are important to businesses because they 
need the revenues to cover the production costs and to make a profit,
 ∎ Profitability: Usually the higher the sales figures are, the more profit a business will 
make (with certain limitations). Profits are important because they reimburse the own-
ers for the invested money and they can be retained and reinvested in the business.

--- book p.34 / pdf 32 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS34
Marketing
5.3 Product orientation versus market orientation
Over the past decades, many businesses have moved from a product-oriented approach 
towards a market-oriented approach. While a product-oriented business focuses on the 
product and its specifications first and later thinks about how to sell it, the market-oriented 
business will first analyse customers’ needs and wants and then tailor their products to 
fulfil these requirements. Both businesses may have some of the marketing objectives 
mentioned above (they may even be identical), but the product-oriented business mainly 
relies on the quality of the features of the product to be successful in the market. The 
market-oriented approach has the advantage of anticipating changing needs and wants 
and of responding to these market changes earlier than the product-oriented competitors. 
It largely depends on the product itself and the number of competitors which of the two 
approaches is more suitable for a business. However, the market and the expectations of 
customers should not be neglected.
Figure 10. Product orientation versus market orientation
Customer relationship management (CRM)  aims at creating a long-term relationship 
with customers. Their data is kept to mail or email them newsletters, coupons and product 
information so that they will come back and buy again. Using personal data has become a 
very important topic and the sensitive use of personal data is indispensable. However, by 
using personal accounts and loyalty cards, customers often give up their anonymity will-
ingly in order to receive discounts and use other special offers. So many businesses collect 
data on their customers and their buying behaviours and can tailor their offers to their 
customers’ personal preferences. 
Focus on production
and product features
Product orientation
Sales
A good product sells itself /
advertisement
Focus on customers’
needs/wants
Market orientation
Producing what customers
need/want

--- book p.35 / pdf 33 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 35
5.4 The need for more responsibility and sustainability
It is often claimed that businesses not only focus on what customers need or want, but that 
they also create wishes and needs by continuously developing new products and advertis-
ing them, sometimes even in unethical ways. The fact is that many people spend more 
money than they can afford to or at least more than they initially intended to spend. They 
buy things that they do not really need and will not use (or just for a very short period of 
time). Therefore, it seems desirable that both businesses and consumers become more 
aware of the importance of sustainable production and consumption and realise the poten-
tial risks of consuming too much. Both businesses and consumers need to act in a more 
responsible and sustainable way. Tina and Steve hope to contribute to sustainability with 
their business. Computers should be used longer and not immediately replaced if a prob-
lem occurs, but repaired and reused. There are similar tendencies in the market for clothes. 
More and more people no longer want to buy cheap clothes that are thrown away after a 
few months. They prefer high-quality clothes that they can give to their friends and might 
get some other good clothes in return. Renting high-quality clothes is another trend. In-
stead of buying (cheap) clothes for a particular event you rent clothes of higher quality and 
return them afterwards.
5.5 Market research
Market research provides information about existing and prospective customers of a busi-
ness, the (potential) buyers of its product(s), about the competition, and the industry in 
general. This information, the research data, can be based on two sources.
5.5.1 Primary sources
Primary information is gained by conducting an empirical study or having data collected by 
a market research institute. This study can be tailored to the needs and interests of the 
business. A business might be interested to know who their customers are, which products 
they buy, what they think about these products, if they also buy similar products of other 
businesses. Steve and Tina for example would love to know more about their prospective 
customers: which computers do they need/want? How much are they willing to pay for 
laptops? How much and which kind of support do they need? And do men and women, 
older and younger users differ in their answers to these questions? 
But conducting a study can be very costly: administering hundreds or thousands of ques-
tionnaires, conducting personal or telephone interviews, setting up an online survey, ana-
lysing and interpreting the data costs a lot. Especially small businesses often cannot afford 
this sort of market research.
5.5.2 Secondary sources
Secondary information is based on existing research that has already been done by some-
body else (and maybe for some other purpose). Government agencies, trade and/or indus-
try associations or other businesses often conduct research that is available free of charge 
and might also serve the purpose of learning more about the market. However, in most 
cases, the information will be very general and not tailored to the specific interests of a 
business.

--- book p.36 / pdf 34 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS36
Marketing
5.5.3 Customer analysis
Customer analysis will often be an important element of market research activities. In order 
to learn more about (potential) customers, a business will try to learn more about:
 ∎ Who its current and potential customers are: If they are consumers, the business op-
erates in a business-to-consumer market (B2C), otherwise in a business-to-business 
market (B2B). Also, the buyer and the user of a product might not be the same persons. 
Some people might influence the buying decisions (e.g. children), although the pur-
chase is made by someone else (the parents, grandparents etc.).
 ∎ What the customers do with the products: The more a business knows about the pre-
ferred use of a product, the more it can develop and improve it according to customers’ 
needs.
 ∎ Where the customers buy the products: This piece of information helps identify the 
preferred channels of distribution. An analysis can also show weaknesses in the distri-
bution channels and encourage the use of alternative channels.
 ∎ When the customers buy the products: This can be helpful to identify seasonal fluctua-
tions and accordingly plan ahead the production and consider price differentiation over 
the year.
 ∎ Why customers choose a product or why they prefer another product: Learning more 
about motives and preferences is important for product development and for enhanc-
ing market share.
5.5.4 Market measures
Market research can also focus on measuring the market. Market size (or market volume) 
is the total sales of a product of all the businesses in the market. Market size can be ex-
pressed as a value (e.g. in euros) or as a quantity (number of pieces sold). AT&S, for ex-
ample, is interested in the electronics market, especially in the market for substrates and 
PCBs. It is relevant for AT&S to see how these markets develop in order to evaluate its own 
position in the market and the potential development in the years to come. That is why at 
AT&S they have researched and collected data on these markets, as can be read in the an-
nual report.