--- book p.17 / pdf 15 ---
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS 17
3 Focus on different types of businesses
Private households come in many different forms – large families, singles, couples, with or 
without children – and so do businesses. The large variety of businesses is due to the fact 
that they differ in the factors of production that they combine, in the sector(s) they operate 
in and in size. But they all need to consider their stakeholders around them and the envi-
ronment.
3.1 Businesses combine different factors of production
As mentioned earlier in the introduction, a business is an entity that offers goods and/or 
services to customers. In order to do so, it combines different factors of production, the 
resources used to create goods and services. The most important factors are 
 ∎ labour (all human resources), 
 ∎ land (all natural resources), 
 ∎ capital (resources like machinery, plant, vehicles, financial resources), and 
 ∎ entrepreneurship (which brings land, labour and capital together) as well as 
 ∎ knowledge and technology. 
Depending on the factors that are dominant for the production process, a wide range of 
businesses can be found. Tina and Steve are mainly combining their own knowledge and 
skills, labour, technology and some capital as well as entrepreneurship. AT&S combines all 
factors of production. A winemaker with large vineyards combines land, labour, capital and 
entrepreneurship, but his business might also be dependent on his knowledge, experience 
and some technology.
3.2 Businesses operate in the primary, secondary 
and/or tertiary sector
Depending on what a business does, it contributes to one (or more) of three sectors of the 
economy. The three-sector model differentiates between three sectors of activity: 
The primary sector refers to the 
extraction of raw materials from the 
earth. It mainly comprises farming, 
fishing, mining and forestry. Emerg-
ing countries (which are economi-
cally less developed) usually de-
pend largely on the primary sector.
Businesses of the secondary 
sector transform raw materials 
into goods (manufacturing). Such 
businesses produce cars, ships, 
machinery, printed circuit boards 
and IC substrates (like AT&S), 
computers, clothes etc.
