as people: legal persons can – just like natural per-
sons – own land and property, hire people, close contracts, sue and be sued. The people
who found the corporation and own a share of the business need not be involved in the
management of the business, and the managers need not own a share of the business.
Corporations are more difficult to set up, but the shareholders’ liability is usually limited to
the amount of money they invested when buying the shares.
4.3.1 Shareholders are not (necessarily) managers of the business
So if shareholders only provide the money for share capital but are neither obliged nor en-
titled to manage the company, who does? The corporation is managed by the board of
directors, persons who are elected by the shareholders to make all major business deci-
sions and to represent the shareholders.
The highest-ranking manager of this board is called the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Other
board members are the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief
Information Officer (CIO) or Chief Marketing Officer (CMO). The board of directors of AT&S
consists of three persons with different tasks and responsibilities (see below).

-- 23 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S	26
Forms of business ownership and sources of finance
a) 	Andreas Gerstenmayer is Chairman of the Management Board (CEO)
and responsible for
∎ 	Sales/marketing
∎ 	Investor Relations/Public Relations/
Internal Communication
∎ 	Purchasing
∎ 	Business Development Strategy
∎ 	Compliance
b) 	Monika Stoisser-Göhring is Deputy Chairwoman of the Management Board
and as SFO responsible for
∎ 	Finance and Accounting
∎ 	Controlling
∎ 	Human Resources incl. CSR
∎ 	Legal & Internal Audit
∎ 	IT & Tools
c) 	Heinz Moitzi is COO and responsible for:
∎ 	Research & Development (R&D)
∎ 	Maintenance
∎ 	Production
∎ 	Quality Assurance
∎ 	Supply and Disposal
∎ 	Quality Management
∎ 	Business Process Excellence
∎ 	Environment & Sustainability
∎ 	Safety
Source: AT&S annual report 2017/18. The board of directors of AT&S, p. 11.
4.3.2 Available financial funds for corporations
Corporations usually have more options to raise financial funds than sole proprietors and
partnerships. Their financial funds mainly comprise share capital as well as loans and
credit.
Share capital
The capital of a corporation is divided into shares, which is why it is called share capital. If
share capital equals 1,000,000 euros and is divided by 100,000 shares, each share (also
called stock) represents 10 euros or 0.001 per cent of the share capital. Persons who buy
shares become shareholders. Shares can be bought either at the time they are initially is-
sued by the corporation or later on from some other shareholder who sells his shares. If all
100,000 shares are actually sold, the corporation gains 1,000,000 euros as share capital.
This example shows that huge amounts of money can be raised from the sale of shares.
The share capital of AT&S for example equals 141,846,000 euros. Share capital is usually
not redeemed by the company. It is long-term capital or even permanent capital.
A corporation’s stock can but does not have to be listed on a stock market or stock ex-
change. A stock exchange is a financial market, regulated by the authorities, where shares
and other securities (e.g. bonds) can be easily bought and sold by lots of people and busi-
nesses. The corporations that want their shares to be listed have to comply with certain
rules and fulfil listing requirements. The shares are introduced on the stock exchange at a
certain price (this introduction is also called initial public offering (IPO)) and then the prices
are determined by demand and supply. According to the laws of supply and demand, usu-
ally the prices go up if demand for shares is high and vice versa. There are a lot of reasons
why demand for shares of a corporation can change: rising demand can be due to people’s
expectations that the business is doing well, that it will make profits in the (near) future,

-- 24 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S 	27
that it will increase market share and/or successfully introduce a new product. Demand for
shares is also influenced by economic indicators like economic growth, interest rates and
inflation. Usually there is higher demand for shares when the economy is thriving (because
many people have money to invest), with comparatively higher rates of inflation (because
share prices would also increase) and comparatively low interest rates (because high inter-
est rates would make other investments more attractive). Please note that an increase in
share prices after they have been issued does not have any additional financing effect for
the issuing corporation. The beneficiaries of this increase are the shareholders only.
Among the biggest and most well-known stock markets of the world are the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE), Nasdaq Inc. in New York, London Stock Exchange (LSE), Tokyo
Stock Exchange, Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, and Shanghai Stock Exchange. Apart
from the LSE, the most important stock exchanges in Europe are the Deutsche Börse in
Frankfurt, the NYSE Euronext (Europe), the SIX Swiss Exchange (Geneva, Basel and Zurich),
Borsa Italiana in Milan, and the Spanish Exchange.
There are many reasons why people invest in shares. The most important reasons are:
∎ 	The intent to provide money for a business they believe in and want to support finan-
cially.
∎ 	Annual income: The wish to get dividends in return; dividends are (part of the) profits
of the corporation that are paid to the shareholders. There is no obligation for a cor-
poration to do so, but if no dividends are paid over a longer period of time, the shares
might become unattractive for investors and decreasing demand might lead to falling
share prices.
∎ 	Capital growth: The hope that share prices will rise and the shares can be sold at a
higher price than they were bought at.
∎ 	The wish to go to the annual stockholders’ meeting and have the chance to vote and
influence some business decisions (because common stock includes the right to vote
at the stockholders’ meeting). Shareholders of preferred shares of stock do not have
this right but earn a higher dividend.
∎ 	That an investment in shares represents an investment in real values that will not
lose its value so easily even in times of high inflation.
In some English-speaking countries, the public limited company (PLC) is one type of such
a corporation. The term PLC is more commonly used in the United Kingdom and some Com-
monwealth countries. In the USA and other countries, you would rather find the denomina-
tion “Inc.”, which stands for “Incorporated”, or “Ltd” for “Limited”. In German-speaking
countries this form of legal structure for a business is called “Aktiengesellschaft” (abbrevi-
ated AG) as “Aktien” means “shares” and “Gesellschaft” stands for “corporation”. The min-
imum capital requirement for founding an AG is 70,000 euros, which is the main reason why
Tina and Steve do not consider an AG the appropriate legal structure for their business.
Another type of corporation is the European Company (SE, société européenne). It is sim-
ilar to an “Aktiengesellschaft” or PLC governed by Community law directly applicable in all
– and only in – member states of the European Union.
AT&S is an “Aktiengesellschaft” according to Austrian law, and the shares were initially
listed on the Neuer Markt of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in July 1999. In spring 2008,
AT&S decided to switch to the home stock exchange in Vienna. AT&S has been quoted in

-- 25 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S	28
Forms of business ownership and sources of finance
the Vienna Stock Exchange’s Prime Market segment since 20 May 2008. At the same time,
application for delisting from the Frankfurt Stock Exchange and withdrawal of the admission
for AT&S shares to be traded on the regulated market (Prime Standard) of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange was filed. The delisting became effective as of Sunday, 14 September 2008. There-
fore, the last day on which AT&S shares could be traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange was
Friday, 12 September 2008. Since Monday, 15 September 2008, AT&S shares have been list-
ed exclusively on the Vienna Stock Exchange (source: https://ats.net/investors/ats-share/
basic-information/).
According to the annual report that AT&S has to publish in order to provide information
about its business activities and financial performance, about one third of the shares are
held by two foundations. The rest is free float, which means that these two thirds of shares
are actually available on the stock exchange. A number of institutional investors have in-
vested in shares of AT&S, but around one third of the stocks are held by private investors
and other shareholders.
Figure 8. Shareholder structure of AT&S (source: annual report 2017/18)
There are some key figures on shares that are of interest for investors:
Share price and its development is one of them, and as can be seen from table 2, the price
has risen over the past years, peaking at a price of almost 28 euros in the financial year
2017/18 and falling to 22 euros at the end of that financial year.
Market capitalisation or “market cap” is another metric that is often used – especially by
institutional investors – to evaluate a corporation’s size. In order to diversify their risks,
investors usually buy shares from a number of companies that differ in various criteria, one
of which is company size. Market cap is the total market value of a company’s (outstanding)
shares (= shares currently held by all the shareholders multiplied by the current market
price). Market cap is not necessarily a meaningful metric for the value of a company be-
cause there are many reasons (that are not related to the value of the company) why share
price might be particularly high or low.
Dividend yield expresses the dividend in relation to the share price.
Price–earnings ratio (P/E ratio) per share refers to a company’s current share price rela-
tive to its earnings per share. A P/E ratio of 15.94 means that an investor can expect to in-

-- 26 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S 	29
vest almost 16 euros in AT&S in order to receive one euro of AT&S’s earnings. This ratio can
be used to make comparisons between companies or for one company over time. A low P/E
ratio usually indicates either that the shares are currently undervalued or that the company
is thriving and earnings are high.
Table 2. Key stock figures for AT&S (source: annual report 2017/18)
Liabilities
Apart from loans and credit that other businesses can also use, big corporations also have
the option to issue bonds. Bonds can be regarded as a loan between investors as creditors
and a corporation. The investors provide the corporation with a certain amount of money
for a specific time period, based on an agreement when to repay the debt and how much
interest to pay.
Issuing bonds can be more attractive to corporations than borrowing from banks. The inter-
est rate for bonds is often less than the interest rate for a bank loan. Borrowing large sums
of money at low interest rates enables corporations to invest in long-term assets like plants,
new infrastructure and other large-scale projects.
4.3.3 Private Limited Companies
There are forms of private limited companies in many countries of the world. As a form of
corporation, they are legal persons and the owners’ liability is limited. However, shares
usually are not sold to the general public at the stock exchange but are offered to the other
owners of the company. The Limited Liability Company (LLC) in the USA, private company
limited by shares in the UK, and the “G