ication for delisting from the Frankfurt Stock Exchange and withdrawal of the admission
for AT&S shares to be traded on the regulated market (Prime Standard) of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange was filed. The delisting became effective as of Sunday, 14 September 2008. There-
fore, the last day on which AT&S shares could be traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange was
Friday, 12 September 2008. Since Monday, 15 September 2008, AT&S shares have been list-
ed exclusively on the Vienna Stock Exchange (source: https://ats.net/investors/ats-share/
basic-information/).
According to the annual report that AT&S has to publish in order to provide information
about its business activities and financial performance, about one third of the shares are
held by two foundations. The rest is free float, which means that these two thirds of shares
are actually available on the stock exchange. A number of institutional investors have in-
vested in shares of AT&S, but around one third of the stocks are held by private investors
and other shareholders.
Figure 8. Shareholder structure of AT&S (source: annual report 2017/18)
There are some key figures on shares that are of interest for investors:
Share price and its development is one of them, and as can be seen from table 2, the price
has risen over the past years, peaking at a price of almost 28 euros in the financial year
2017/18 and falling to 22 euros at the end of that financial year.
Market capitalisation or “market cap” is another metric that is often used – especially by
institutional investors – to evaluate a corporation’s size. In order to diversify their risks,
investors usually buy shares from a number of companies that differ in various criteria, one
of which is company size. Market cap is the total market value of a company’s (outstanding)
shares (= shares currently held by all the shareholders multiplied by the current market
price). Market cap is not necessarily a meaningful metric for the value of a company be-
cause there are many reasons (that are not related to the value of the company) why share
price might be particularly high or low.
Dividend yield expresses the dividend in relation to the share price.
Price–earnings ratio (P/E ratio) per share refers to a company’s current share price rela-
tive to its earnings per share. A P/E ratio of 15.94 means that an investor can expect to in-

-- 26 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S 	29
vest almost 16 euros in AT&S in order to receive one euro of AT&S’s earnings. This ratio can
be used to make comparisons between companies or for one company over time. A low P/E
ratio usually indicates either that the shares are currently undervalued or that the company
is thriving and earnings are high.
Table 2. Key stock figures for AT&S (source: annual report 2017/18)
Liabilities
Apart from loans and credit that other businesses can also use, big corporations also have
the option to issue bonds. Bonds can be regarded as a loan between investors as creditors
and a corporation. The investors provide the corporation with a certain amount of money
for a specific time period, based on an agreement when to repay the debt and how much
interest to pay.
Issuing bonds can be more attractive to corporations than borrowing from banks. The inter-
est rate for bonds is often less than the interest rate for a bank loan. Borrowing large sums
of money at low interest rates enables corporations to invest in long-term assets like plants,
new infrastructure and other large-scale projects.
4.3.3 Private Limited Companies
There are forms of private limited companies in many countries of the world. As a form of
corporation, they are legal persons and the owners’ liability is limited. However, shares
usually are not sold to the general public at the stock exchange but are offered to the other
owners of the company. The Limited Liability Company (LLC) in the USA, private company
limited by shares in the UK, and the “G