WU Bachelor Program Business and Economics –
Study Material for the Entrance Exam
Introduction
to Business
and Economics
Bettina Fuhrmann

-- 1 of 63 --

2 	I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S
Foreword and acknowledgements
This script has been written for students who are interested in the English WU bachelor
study programme Business and Economics and want to take the entry exam. The content
of this script has been taken from the book Fuhrmann, Bettina: Introduction to Business and
Economics. Verlag Jugend & Volk, Wien, 2019. It is the aim of this book to explain some ba-
sic concepts of business and economics and their interrelationships to those who are in-
terested but have little previous knowledge of business matters and economic issues. As
both business studies and economics are comprehensive, multifaceted and interdisciplin-
ary scientific fields, a short introduction can only cover selected topics. Nevertheless, it is
the intention of this short introduction to provide a solid basis on which to build more
knowledge as well as to spark an enduring interest in business and economics and moti-
vate readers to learn more.
Such a textbook – no matter how many pages it has – always profits from feedback from
other business teachers who are experts in their respective fields. I consider myself very
lucky to have colleagues who have done so and contributed to the development of the text.
Therefore, I would like to thank (in alphabetical order)
Nora Cechovsky, Jesus Crespo Cuaresma, Ingrid Dobrovits, Eva Eberhartinger,
Richard Fortmüller, Gerhard Geissler, Edith Littich, Harald Oberhofer,
Rupert Sausgruber, Christiane Schopf, Gerhard Speckbacher,
Rosanna Steininger, Barbara Stöttinger and Julia Szoncsitz
for their valuable comments on the manuscript.
I would also like to thank my family for letting me work on the book not only during count-
less evenings but also on weekends. As it is my firm belief that economic knowledge is of
utmost importance to each and every person regardless of his or her age, gender, or per-
sonal background, I dedicate the book to all young learners who should understand – the
sooner the better – that they are all an active part of the economy and there is no opting
out of economic decisions.
Bettina Fuhrmann
Director of the Institute for Business Education
Vienna University of Economics and Business
Vienna, 2019

-- 2 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S 	3
Contents
1. 	Introduction to business matters 	4
2. 	Basic economic concepts 	7
2.1 Being part of the economy 	7
2.2 Scarcity of resources and opportunity cost 	7
2.3 Economics is the study of economic decisions 	8
2.4 Exchanging goods and services creates a circular flow and division of labour 	8
2.5 Different economic systems 	10
2.6 Supply and demand: households, businesses and the government meet in the
market 11
2.7 Competition in the market 	14
3. 	Focus on different types of businesses 	15
3.1 Businesses combine different factors of production 	15
3.2 Businesses operate in the primary, secondary and/or tertiary sector 	15
3.3 Businesses can be profit-oriented or not-for-profit 	16
3.4 Businesses come “in all sizes”: large and small 	17
3.5 Businesses may be local, national or international 	17
3.6 Businesses operate in an environment – stakeholders are important 	18
4. 	Forms of business ownership and sources of finance 	21
4.1 Sole proprietorship / sole traders 	22
4.2 Partnership 	23
4.3 Corporations 	23
4.4 Summary: Overview of forms of business ownership 	28
4.5 Overview of sources of finance 	29
4.6 The choice of the source of finance 	29
5. 	Marketing 	30
5.1 What a product is 	31
5.2 Objectives of marketing 	31
5.3 Product orientation versus market orientation 	32
5.4 The need for more responsibility and sustainability 	33
5.5 Market research 	33
5.6 Market segmentation and targeting strategies 	37
5.7 The marketing mix 	39
6. 	Accounting – keeping record of business transactions 	50
6.1 What a balance sheet is 	50
6.2 Other components of the financial statement of a business 	52
6.3 What can be learnt from reading a balance sheet and an income statement 	55
6.4 Use of these accounts – types of accounting 	58
6.5 Analysis of financial statements 	59
… to be continued in the book
7. 	Personnel management – because people matter
8. 	Writing a business plan
9. 	Case study

-- 3 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S	6
Basic economic concepts
1 	Introduction to business matters
Over the past few years Tina has noticed that
quite a lot of people buy new computers even
though their old ones are still working. At the
same time other people are perfectly happy with a
used computer as long as it works. They do not
need to have the latest model, they are just inter-
ested in having access to the Internet and the
computer programs that they want to use. What is
more, many people need help to get started with
their new computer, and some also need help later on with new releases of software, data
storage and security issues.
At school and also later during their university studies, Tina and her former classmate
Steve specialised in computer science and in business. They have always tried to help their
families and friends with any computer is-
sues. And as more and more friends of their
friends as well as neighbours and acquain-
tances of their families have asked for help,
they have considered starting a business
that offers a wide range of professional
computer services.
A business is an entity that offers goods
and/or services to customers. Businesses
do not produce primarily for their own needs
or work exclusively for their families’ and
friends’ needs, but for someone else: for their customers. Businesses usually charge a
price for their goods and services so that they get something in return. Exchanging goods
and services against money or other means of payment (or exchange) is a main
characteristic of the economy.
Tina and Steve consider the following idea: buying used computers at a low price, checking
and repairing them (if necessary), and adjusting/modifying them to the needs and wishes
of their customers. By doing so, Tina and Steve are able to offer ready-to-use computers at
an affordable price and create value for their customers.
They also consider offering additional services such as setting up the computer at the us-
er’s home, installing software, connecting the computer to the Internet, explaining how to
use the computer etc. Another idea that comes to their minds is offering online help for
problems that might occur. Customers facing a problem with their computer would be sup-
ported within 24 hours. Tina and Steve are even considering developing tailor-made soft-
ware for their customers. With so many ideas, Tina and Steve are convinced that they can
start a profitable business. That is exactly what they want to do as they need to earn mon-
ey to make a living.

-- 4 of 63 --

I N T RO D U C T I O N TO B U S I N E S S A N D E CO N O M I C S 	7
Alternatively, Tina and Steve could easily find jobs that they are interested in because they
both have a profound knowledge of business and computer science. During their studies
both of them worked for AT&S, the Austrian company Austria Technologie & Systemtechnik
AG, for a couple of months and they liked that very much. AT&S (https://ats.net/de/) is a
manufacturer of high-end printed circuit boards and of new technologies such as IC sub-
strates, mSAP and advanced packaging. It is located in Styria with some production sites
in Asia and ranks among the globally leading companies in that field. In Europe, AT&S is
the market leader, with revenue of about €990 million and almost 10,000 employees.
However, at the moment, they both prefer the idea of being self-employed, generating their
own ideas, creating something new and being their own bosses. They prefer to become
entrep